- The following is a conversation
with Joel David Hamkins, a
mathematician and philosopher
specializing in set theory,
the foundation of mathematics
and the nature of
infinity. He is the number one highest
rated user on MathOverflow,
which I think is a legendary
accomplishment. MathOverflow, by
the way, is like StackOverflow
but for research mathematicians. He is
also the author of several
books, including Proof
in the Art of Mathematics
and Lectures on the
Philosophy of Mathematics.
And he has a great blog,
infinitelymore.xyz. This
is a super technical and
super fun conversation about the
foundation of modern mathematics
and some mind-bending
ideas about infinity,
nature of reality, truth,
and the mathematical
paradoxes that challenged some of the
greatest minds of the 20th century.
I have been hiding from the world a bit,
reading, thinking, writing, soul-searching,
as we all do every once in a while.
But mostly, just deeply focused
on work and preparing mentally
for some challenging travel I
plan to take on in the new year. Through
all of it, a recurring thought comes to me,
how damn lucky I am to
be alive and to get to
experience so much love
from folks across the
world. I want to take this
moment to say thank you
from the bottom of my heart
for everything, for your
support, for the many amazing
conversations I've had
with people across the world.
I got a little bit of hate
and a whole lot of love,
and I wouldn't have it
any other way. I'm grateful for all of it.
This is the Lex Fridman Podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description,
where you can also
find ways to contact me, ask questions,
give feedback, and so on. And now, dear
friends, here's Joel David Hamkins.
Some infinities are bigger
than others. This idea from
Cantor at the end of the 19th
century, I think it's fair to
say, broke mathematics
before rebuilding it. And
I also read that this was a devastating
and transformative discovery for
several reasons. So one,
it created a theological
crisis. Because infinity is associated
with God, how could there be multiple
infinities? And also,
Cantor was deeply religious
himself. Second, there's a
kind of mathematical civil
war. The leading German mathematician
Kronecker called Cantor a corrupter of youth
and tried to block his career. Third, many
fascinating paradoxes emerged
from this, like Russell's
paradox, about the set of all sets
that don't contain themselves,
and those threatened to
make all of mathematics
inconsistent. And finally, on the
psychological side and the personal
side, Cantor's own breakdown.
He literally went mad,
spending his final years in and
out of sanatoriums, obsessed with
proving the continuum hypothesis.
So, laying that all out on the
table, can you explain the idea of
infinity, that some infinities are
larger than others, and why was this
so transformative to mathematics?
- Well, that's a really great
question. I would want to start
talking about infinity and
telling the story much
earlier than Cantor, actually, because,
I mean, you can go all the way
back to Ancient Greek times when Aristotle
emphasized the potential
aspect of infinity as opposed
to the impossibility, according
to him, of achieving an actual
infinity. And Archimedes'
method of exhaustion where
he is trying to understand
the area of a region
by carving it into more and
more triangles, say, and
sort of exhausting the area and thereby
understanding the total area in terms
of the sum of the areas of the
pieces that he put into it.
And it proceeded on this kind of potential
understanding of infinity for hundreds of years,
thousands of years. Almost
all mathematicians were
almost all mathematicians
were potentialists only and
thought that it was incoherent
to speak of an actual
infinity at all. Galileo is an extremely
prominent exception to this, though he
argued against this sort
of potentialist orthodoxy
in The Dialogue of Two New
Sciences. Really lovely
account there that he gave. And that the...
In many ways, Galileo was anticipating
Cantor's developments, except he
couldn't quite push it all the way
through and ended up throwing
up his hands in confusion
in a sense. I mean, the Galileo
paradox is the idea or the
observation that if you think
about the natural numbers,
I would start with zero but I think maybe
he would start with one. The numbers one,
two, three, four, and so on, and
you think about which of those
numbers are perfect
squares. So zero squared is
zero and one squared is one
and two squared is four, three
squared is nine, 16, 25,
and so on. And Galileo
observed that, that the
perfect squares can be
put into a one-to-one
correspondence with all of the
numbers. I mean, we just did
it. I associated every number
with its square. And so it seems
like on the basis of this
one-to-one correspondence that
there should be exactly the same number of
squares, perfect squares
as there are numbers, and
yet there's all the gaps in
between the perfect squares,
right? And, and this suggests that there
should be fewer perfect squares, more
numbers than squares because the numbers
include all the squares plus a lot more in
between them, right? And Galileo was quite
troubled by this observation because
he took it to cause a kind
of incoherence in the
comparison of infinite quantities,
right? And another example
is, if you take two line
segments of different lengths,
and you can imagine drawing
a kind of foliation,
a fan of lines that connect
them. So the endpoints are
matched from the shorter to the longer
segment, and the midpoints are matched and
so on. So spreading out the
lines as you go. And so every
point on the shorter line
would be associated with
a, a unique distinct point
on the longer line in a
one-to-one way. And so
it seems like the two
line segments have the same number of
points on them because of that, even
though the longer one is longer. And so it
makes, again, a kind of confusion
over our ideas about infinity. And
also with two circles,
if you just place them
concentrically and draw
the rays from the center,
then every point on the
smaller circle is associated
with a corresponding point on the
larger circle, you know, in a
one-to-one way. And, and again,
that seems to show that the
smaller circle has the same number of
points on it as the larger one, precisely
precisely because they can be put
into this one-to-one correspondence.
Of course, the contemporary attitude
about this situation is that those two
infinities are exactly the same,
and that Galileo was right in those
observations about the equinumerosity.
We would talk about it now
by appealing to what I call the
Cantor-Hume principle, or some people
just call it Hume's principle, which
is the idea that if you have two
collections, whether they're finite
or infinite, then we want to
say that those two collections
have the same size. They're
equinumerous if and only
if there's a one-to-one
correspondence between those
collections. Galileo was
observing that line segments of
different lengths are equinumerous,
and the perfect squares are
equinumerous with all of the
natural numbers, and any two
circles are equinumerous, and so
on. The tension between the Cantor-Hume
principle and what could be called
Euclid's principle, which is that the
whole is always greater than the
part, is a principle that Euclid
appealed to in the Elements many
times when he's calculating
area and so on. It's a basic idea
that if something is just a
part of another thing, then the
whole is greater than the
part. So what Galileo
was troubled by was this tension between
what we call the Cantor-Hume
principle and Euclid's
principle. It wasn't fully resolved, I
think, until Cantor. He's
the one who really explained
so clearly about these different
sizes of infinity and so on
in a way that was so compelling. He
exhibited two different
infinite sets and proved that
they're not equinumerous; they
can't be put into one-to-one
correspondence. It's
traditional to talk about the
uncountability of the real numbers.
Cantor's big result was that the
set of all real numbers is an
uncountable set. Maybe if we're
going to talk about countable sets,
then I would suggest that we talk
about Hilbert's Hotel, which really
makes that idea perfectly clear.
- Yeah, let's talk about Hilbert's Hotel.
- Hilbert's Hotel is a hotel with
infinitely many rooms. Each
room is a full floor suite. So
there's floor zero... I always
start with zero because for me, the natural
numbers start with zero, although that's
maybe a point of contention for
some mathematicians. The other
mathematicians are wrong.
- Like I mentioned, I'm a programmer, so starting
at zero is a wonderful place to start.
- Exactly. So there's floor zero,
floor one, floor two, or room zero,
one, two, three, and so on, just like the
natural numbers. So Hilbert's Hotel has a
room for every natural number,
and it's completely full. There's
a person occupying room N for
every N. But meanwhile, a
new guest comes up to the
desk and wants a room. "Can I have
a room, please?" The manager says,
"Hang on a second, just give me a moment."
You see, when the other guests had
checked in, they had to sign an
agreement with the hotel that maybe
there would be some changing
of the rooms during this stay.
So the manager sent a message
up to all the current
occupants and told every
person, "Hey, can you
move up one room, please?" So the
person in room five would move to
room six, and the person in room six would
move to room seven and so on. And everyone
moved at the same time. And of course, we
never want to be placing two different
guests in the same room, and we want
everyone to have their own private room
and... But when you move everyone
up one room, then the bottom
room, room zero, becomes available, of
course. And so he can put the new guest in
that room. So even when
you have infinitely many
things, then the new guest can be
accommodated. And that's a way of
showing how the particular
infinity of the occupants of
Hilbert's Hotel, it violates
Euclid's principle. I
mean, it exactly illustrates
this idea because
adding one more element to a set
didn't make it larger, because we
can still have a one-to-one
correspondence between the total new
guests and the old guests
by the room number, right?
- So, to just say one more
time, the hotel is full.
- The hotel is full.
- And then you could still squeeze
in one more, and that breaks
the traditional notion of
mathematics and breaks
people's brains when they try to think
about infinity, I suppose. This is
a property of infinity.
- It's a property of infinity
that sometimes when you add an
element to a set, it doesn't
get larger. That's what this
example shows. But one
can go on with Hilbert's
Hotel, for example. I mean,
maybe the next day, you know,
20 people show up all at once. We can
easily do the same trick again, just move
everybody up 20 rooms.
And then we would have 20
empty rooms at the bottom, and
those new 20 guests could go
in. But on the following weekend,
a giant bus pulled up, Hilbert's
bus. And Hilbert's bus has, of course,
infinitely many seats. There's Seat Zero,
Seat One, Seat Two, Seat Three, and so
on. And so one wants to... You know,
all the people on the bus want
to check into the hotel, but the hotel is
completely full. So what is the manager going to
do? And when I talk about Hilbert's Hotel,
when I teach Hilbert's Hotel in
class, I always demand that the
students provide, you know, the
explanation of- of how to do it.
So maybe I'll ask you.
Can you tell me, yeah, what is your idea about
how to fit them all in the hotel, everyone
on the bus, and also
the current occupants?
- You separate the hotel into even and
odd rooms, and you squeeze in the new
Hilbert bus people into the odd
rooms and the previous occupants
go into the even rooms.
- That's exactly right. That's a
very easy way to do it. If you
just tell all the current guests
to double their room number, so in
Room N, you move to Room 2 times N.
So they're all going to get their own
private room, the new room, and it will always be
an even number 'cause 2 times N is always an even
number. And so all the odd rooms
become empty that way. And now we can
put the bus occupants into
the odd-numbered rooms.
- And by doing so, you have now shoved
an infinity into another infinity.
- That's right. So what it really shows...
I mean, another way of thinking
about it is that, well, we
can define that a set is
countable if it is equinumerous
with a set of natural
numbers. And a kind of easy
way to understand what that's
saying in terms of Hilbert's Hotel is that
a set is countable if it fits into
Hilbert's Hotel, 'cause Hilbert's Hotel
basically is the set of natural numbers
in terms of the room numbers. So to be
equinumerous with a set of natural numbers is
just the same thing as to fit into Hilbert's
Hotel. And so what we've shown is that
if you have two countably
infinite sets, then their
union is also countably infinite. If you
put them together and form a new set
with all of the elements of either of
them, then that union set is still
only countably infinite.
It didn't get bigger.
And that's a remarkable
property for a notion
of infinity to have, I suppose. But
if you thought that there was only
one kind of infinity, then it wouldn't be
surprising at all, because if you take
two infinite sets and put them together, then it's
still infinite. And so if there were only one kind of
infinity, then it
shouldn't be surprising...
that the union of two countable sets
is countable. So there's another way
to push this a bit harder, and
that is when Hilbert's train
arrives, and Hilbert's train has
infinitely many train cars...
...and each train car has
infinitely many seats.
And so we have an infinity
of infinities of the train
passengers together with the
current occupants of the
hotel, and everybody on the train
wants to check in to Hilbert's Hotel.
So the manager can, again, of
course, send a message up to all the
rooms telling every person to double
their room number again. And
so that will occupy all the
even-numbered rooms again,
and but free up again the
odd-numbered rooms. So somehow, we
want to put the train passengers
into the odd-numbered rooms. And so while
every train passenger is on some
car, let's say Car C and Seat S,
so somehow, we have to take these
two coordinates, you know, C,
S, the car number and the
seat number, and produce from
it an odd number in a one-to-one way, you
know? And that's actually
not very difficult. In
fact, one can just use, say... An easy
way to do it is to just use the number
3 to the C times 5 to the S. 3 to the
C, 3 to the car number, so 3 x 3 x
3, you know, the number of the
car. You multiply 3 by itself, the
number of the train car, and
then you multiply 5 by itself
the seat number of times, and then you
multiply those two numbers together. So
3 to the C times 5 to the S. That's
always an odd number, 'cause the
prime factorization has only 3s and
5s in it. There's no 2
there. So therefore, it's
definitely an odd number, and
it's always different because
of the uniqueness of prime
factorization. So every number
can be factored uniquely into primes.
So if you have a number of that form,
then you can just factor it, and that
tells you the exponent on 3 and the
exponent on 5. And so you know exactly
which person it was, which car
they came from, and which
seat they came from.
- And prime factorization is
every single number can be
decomposed into the atoms of
mathematics, which is the prime
numbers. You can multiply them
together to achieve that number.
And that's prime factorization. You're
showing 3 and 5 are both prime numbers,
odd. So through this magical
formula, you can deal with this
train, infinite number of cars, with each
car having infinite number of seats.
- Exactly right. We've proved
that if you have countably many
countable sets, then the union of those
sets, putting all those sets
together into one giant set,
is still countable. You know, because the train
cars are each countable, plus the current
hotel. It's sort of like another train car, if
you want to think about it that way. The current
occupants of the hotel could, you
know, have the same number as
any of the train cars. So
putting countably many
countable sets together to
make one big union set is
still countable. It's quite
remarkable, I think. I mean when
I first learned this many, many years
ago, I was completely shocked by it and
transfixed by it. It was quite
amazing to me that this notion
of countable infinity could be
closed under this process of
infinitely many infinities
adding up still to the very same
infinity, which is a strong instance, a
strong violation of Euclid's principle
once again, right? So, the new
set that we built is... has
many more elements than the old
set in the sense that there are additional
elements, but it doesn't have many
more elements in terms of its size
because it's still just a countable
infinity and it fits into Hilbert's Hotel.
- Have you been able to sort of
internalize a good intuition about
countable infinity? Because that is a pretty
weird thing. You can have a countably
infinite set of countably infinite
sets, and you can shove it
all in and it still is a
countable infinite set.
- Yeah, that's exactly
right. I mean, I guess,
of course, when you work with
these notions, the argument of
of Hilbert's Hotel becomes kind of
clear. There are many other ways to
talk about it too. For example,
let's think about, say,
the integer lattice, the
grid of points that you
get by taking pairs of natural
numbers, say, so the upper
right quadrant of the
integer lattice, yeah?
So there's the, you know, row zero, row one, row two and
so on, column zero, column one, column two and so on,
and each row and column has a countable
infinity of points on it, right?
So those dots, if you
think about them as dots,
are really the same as the train
cars if you think about each column
of... in that integer lattice, it's
a countable infinity. It's like one
train car and then there's the next train
car next to it, and then the next column
next to that, the next train car.
And so, but if we think about it in
this grid manner, then I can imagine
a kind of winding path
winding through these grid
points, like up and down the diagonals.
Winding back and forth. So I start at
the corner point and then I go down,
up and to the left, and then down and to the right,
up and to the left, down and to the right, and so on,
in such a way that I'm going to
hit every grid point on this path.
So, this gives me a way of assigning
room numbers to the points.
Because every grid point
is going to be the
Nth point on that path
for some N. And that
that gives a correspondence between the
grid points and the natural numbers
themselves. So it's a kind of different
picture. Before, we used this 3
to the C, 5 times 5 to the
S, which is a kind of, you
know, overly arithmetic way to
think about it. But there's a kind
of direct way to understand
that it's still a
countable infinity when you have countably
many countable sets, because you can just
start putting them on this list. And as long
as you give each of the infinite collections a
chance to add one more
person to the list, then
you're going to accommodate everyone
in any of the sets in one list.
- Yeah, it's a really nice visual way to think about
it. You just zigzag your way across the grid
to make sure everybody's included. That
gives you an algorithm for including
everybody. So, can you speak
to the uncountable infinities?
- Yeah, absolutely.
- What are the integers
and the real numbers-
- Correct
- and what is the line that
Cantor was able to find?
- Maybe there's one more step I
want to insert before doing that.
Which is the rational numbers. So
we did pairs of natural numbers.
Right? That's the train car,
basically. But maybe it's a little
bit informative to think about the
rational, the fractions, the set of
fractions, or rational numbers,
because a lot of people maybe have an
expectation that maybe this is a bigger
infinity because the rational
numbers are densely ordered.
Between any two fractions, you
can find another fraction, right?
The average of two fractions is another
fraction. And so, sometimes people,
it seems to be a different
character than the
integers, which are discretely ordered, right?
From any integer, there's a next one and a
previous one, and so on. But
that's not true in the rational
numbers. And yet, the rational numbers are
also still only a countable infinity.
And the way to see that is actually
it's just exactly the same as Hilbert's
train again, because every fraction
consists of two integers:
the numerator and the
denominator. And so if
I tell you two natural
numbers, then you know what fraction
I'm talking about. I mean, plus the
sign issue, I mean if it's positive or
negative. But if you just think about the
positive fractions, then, you know,
you have the numbers of the form
P over Q, where Q is not
zero. So you can still do
3 to the P times 5 to the
Q. The same idea works.
with the rational numbers.
So this is still a countable
set. And you might think, "Well, every set
is going to be countable because there's only
one infinity." I mean, if that's a kind of
perspective maybe that you're
adopting, but it's not
true, and that's the profound achievement
that Cantor made is proving that the set of
real numbers is not a countable
infinity. It's a strictly larger
infinity, and therefore
there's more than one
concept of infinity, more
than one size of infinity.
- So let's talk about the real numbers. What are
the real numbers? Why do they break infinity?
The countable infinity. Looking
it up on Perplexity, real numbers
include all the numbers that can be represented
on the number line, encompassing both
rational and irrational numbers. We've
spoken about the rational numbers, and the
rational numbers, by the way, are by
definition, the numbers that can be represented
as a fraction of two integers.
- That's right. So with the real numbers,
we have the algebraic numbers. We
have, of course, all the rational numbers. The
integers and the rationals are all part of the
real number system. But then also, we have
the algebraic numbers like the square root of
2 or the cube root of 5 and
so on. Numbers that solve an
algebraic equation over the integers,
those are known as algebraic
numbers. It was an open question
for a long time whether that was
all of the real numbers
or whether there would
exist numbers that are the
transcendental numbers. The
transcendental numbers are real
numbers that are not algebraic.
- And we won't even go to the surreal numbers
about which you have a wonderful blog post.
We'll talk about that a little bit later.
- Oh, great. So it was Liouville
who first proved that
there are transcendental numbers, and
he exhibited a very specific number
that's now known as the Liouville
constant, which is a transcendental
number. Cantor also famously
proved that there are many,
many transcendental numbers.
In fact, it follows from his
argument on the uncountability of
the real numbers that there are
uncountably many transcendental numbers.
So most real numbers are transcendental.
- And again, going to Perplexity, "Transcendental
numbers are 'real' or 'complex'
numbers; they are not the root
of any nonzero polynomial with
integer or rational coefficients.
This means they cannot
be expressed as solutions to algebraic
equations with integer coefficients,
setting them apart from
algebraic numbers."
- So some of the famous transcendental
numbers would include the number pi,
you know, the 3.14159265 and so on.
So that's a transcendental number.
Also, Euler's constant, the
e, like e to the x, the
exponential function.
- So you could say that some of the sexiest numbers
in mathematics are all transcendental numbers?
- Absolutely. That's true. Yeah, yeah. Although,
you know, I don't know, square root of two is
pretty
- Square root. All right. So it depends.
Let's not... Beauty can be found in
in all the different
kinds of sets, but yeah.
- That's right. And if you have a kind of simplicity
attitude, then zero and one are looking pretty good too,
so... And they're definitely not
- Sorry to take that tangent, but what is
your favorite number? Do you have one?
- Oh, gosh. You know-
- Is it zero?
- Did you know there's a
proof that every number is
interesting? You can prove it, because...
- Yeah? What's that proof look like?
- Yeah, okay.
- How do you even begin?
- I'm gonna prove to you-
- Okay
- ...that every natural
number is interesting.
- Okay.
- Yeah. I mean, zero's interesting because
it's the additive identity, right?
That's pretty interesting. And one is
the multiplicative identity, so when you
multiply it by any other number, you
just get that number back, right? And
two is, you know, the first prime number.
That's super interesting, right? And-
Okay. So one can go on this way and
give specific reasons, but I wanna
prove as a general principle that every
number is interesting. And this is
the proof. Suppose, toward contradiction,
that there were some boring numbers.
Okay?
- Oh, okay.
- But if there was an uninteresting number-
- Yes
- ...then there would have to be a
smallest uninteresting number.
- Mm-hmm. Yes.
- But that's a contradiction, because the
smallest uninteresting number is a super
interesting property
to have. So therefore-
- Ah, that's good.
- ...there cannot be any boring numbers.
- I'm gonna have to try to find a hole in
that proof- because there's a lot of
baked in in the word interesting,
but yeah, that's a beautiful.
- Right.
- That doesn't say anything about the transcendental
numbers, about the real numbers that you
just proved from just-
- That's right
- ...four natural numbers.
- Yeah. Okay, should we get back
to Cantor's argument, or-
- Sure.
You've masterfully avoided the question.
Well, you basically said, "I love all
numbers."
- Yeah, basically.
- Is that what you said?
- Yeah. That was my intention.
- Back to Cantor's argument. Let's go.
- Okay, so Cantor wants to prove that
the infinity of the real
numbers is different and
strictly larger than the infinity of
the natural numbers. So the natural
numbers are the numbers that
start with zero and add one
successively, so zero, one, two, three,
and so on. And the real numbers, as
we said, are the numbers
that come from the number
line, including all the integers and the
rationals and the algebraic numbers and
the transcendental numbers and all
of those numbers altogether. Now,
obviously, since the natural numbers
are included in the real numbers,
we know that the real numbers
are at least as large as
the natural numbers. And so the
claim that we want to prove is that
it's strictly larger. So suppose
that it wasn't strictly larger. So
then they would have the same size.
But to have the same size, remember,
means by definition that
there's a one-to-one
correspondence between them.
So we suppose that the real
numbers can be put into one-to-one
correspondence with the natural numbers.
So therefore, for every natural number N, we
have a real number, let's call it R sub N.
R sub N is the Nth real number on the
list. Basically, our assumption allows
us to think of the real numbers as
having been placed on a
list, R1, R2, and so on.
Okay, and now I'm going to define
the number Z, and it's going to
be... The integer part is going to
be a zero, and then I'm going to
put a decimal place, and then I'm going to
start specifying the digits of this number
Z. D1, D2, D3, and so on. And what
I'm going to make sure is
that the Nth digit after the
decimal point of Z is different from the
Nth digit of the Nth number on the list.
Okay? So, to specify the Nth digit of Z, I
go to the Nth number on the list,
R sub N, and I look at its Nth
digit after the decimal point.
And whatever that digit
is, I make sure that my digit
is different from it. Okay?
And then I want to do something
a little bit more, and that is
I'm going to make it different in
a way that I'm never using the
digits zero or nine. I'm just always
using the other digits and not zero
and it would form a kind of diagonal
going down and to the right, and that,
for that reason, this argument is called the
diagonal argument because we're looking at the
Nth digit of the Nth number, and those
exist on a kind of diagonal going
down. And we've made our number Z
so that the Nth digit of Z is different
from the Nth digit of the Nth number.
But now it follows that Z
is not on the list because
Z is different from R1 because, well,
the first digit after the decimal
point of Z is different from the first
digit of R1 after the decimal
point. That's exactly how we built
it. And the second digit of Z is
different from the second digit
of R2 and so on. The Nth
digit of Z is different
from the Nth digit of R
sub N for every N. So
therefore, Z is not equal to any
of these numbers R sub N. And
but that's a contradiction because we had
assumed that we had every real number
on the list, but yet here is a
real number Z that's not on the
list, okay? And so that's
the main contradiction.
- And so it's a kind of
proof by construction.
- Exactly. So given a list
of numbers, Cantor's
proving... It's interesting that you say that
actually, because there's a kind of philosophical
controversy that occurs in connection with
this observation about whether Cantor's
construction is constructive or not.
Given a list of numbers,
Cantor gives us a specific
means of constructing a real number
that's not on the list, is a
way of thinking about it. There's this one
aspect, which I alluded to earlier, but
some real numbers have
more than one decimal
representation, and it
causes this slight problem
in the argument. For example, the
number one, you can write it as 1.0000
forever, but you can also write it
as 0.999 forever. Those are two
different decimal representations
of exactly the same number.
- You beautifully got rid of the zeros and the nines.
Therefore, we don't need to even consider that,
and the proof still works.
- Exactly, because the only kind of
case where that phenomenon occurs is
when the number is eventually zero
or eventually nine. And so since our
number Z never had any zeros or
nines in it, it wasn't one of those
numbers. And so actually, in those cases,
we didn't need to do anything special to
diagonalize. Just the mere fact that
our number has a unique representation
already means that it's not equal
to those numbers. So maybe it
was controversial in Cantor's day more
than 100 years ago, but I think it's
most commonly looked at today
as, you know, one of the
initial main results in
set theory, and it's
profound and amazing and
insightful and the beginning
point of so many later arguments.
And this diagonalization
idea has proved to be an
extremely fruitful proof method,
and almost every major
result in mathematical logic
is using in an abstract way the idea of
diagonalization. It was
really the start of so
many other observations
that were made, including
Russell's paradox and the halting
problem and the recursion
theorem, and so many other principles are
using diagonalization at their core. So...
- Can we just step back a little bit?
- Sure.
- This infinity crisis led to a kind of
rebuilding of mathematics. So it'd be
nice if you lay out the things
it resulted in. So one is
set theory became the foundation of
mathematics. All mathematics could now
be built from sets, giving
math its first truly rigorous
foundation. The axiomatization
of mathematics, the paradoxes forced
mathematicians to develop ZFC and other
axiomatic systems, and mathematical
logic emerged. Gödel, Turing, and
others created entire new fields. So
can you explain what set theory is and,
how does it serve as a foundation of
modern mathematics and maybe even the
foundation of truth?
- That's a great question.
Set theory really has two
roles that it's serving. There's kind
of two ways that set theory emerges.
On the one hand, set theory
is its own subject of
mathematics, with its
own problems and questions
and answers and proof
methods. And so really, from this
point of view, set theory is
about the transfinite recursive constructions
or well-founded definitions and
constructions. And those
ideas have been enormously
fruitful and set theorists
have looked into them and
developed so many ideas
coming out of that. But set
theory has also happened
to serve in this other
foundational role. It's very
common to hear things said about
set theory that really aren't taking
account of this distinction between
the two roles that it's serving. It's its
own subject, but it's also serving as a
foundation of mathematics. So
in its foundational role, set
theory provides a way to think of a
collection of things as one thing.
That's the central idea
of set theory. A set is a
collection of things,
but you think of the set
itself as one abstract
thing. So when you form the
set of real numbers, then that
is a set. It's one thing. It's a
set, and it has elements
inside of it. So it's sort of
like a bag of objects. A set is kind of
like a bag of objects. And so we have a
lot of different axioms that
describe the nature of this
idea of thinking of a collection of things
as one thing itself, one abstract thing.
- And axioms are, I guess, facts that we
assume are true, based on which we then
build the ideas of mathematics. So there's
a bunch of facts, axioms about sets
that we can put together, and
if they're sufficiently......
powerful, we can then build on top of that
a lot of really interesting mathematics.
- Yeah, I think that's right. So, I
mean, the history of the current set
theory axioms, known as the
Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms, came out in the
early 20th century with Zermelo's
idea. I mean, the history is quite
fascinating because Zermelo
in 1904 offered a proof
that what's called the
axiom of choice implies the
well-order principle. So he
described his proof, and that was
extremely controversial at
the time. And there was no
theory, there weren't any axioms there.
Cantor was not working in an axiomatic
framework. He didn't have a list of axioms
in the way that we have for set theory
now, and Zermelo didn't either. And his
ideas were challenged so much with
regard to the well-order theorem—
—that he was pressed to produce the theory
in which his argument could be
formalized, and that was the origin of
what's known as Zermelo set theory.
- And going to perplexity, the axiom of
choice is a fundamental principle in set
theory which states that for any
collection of non-empty sets, it is
possible to select exactly one
element from each set, even
if no explicit rule to make
the choices given. This axiom
allows the construction of a new set
containing one element from each
original set, even in cases
where the collection is infinite
or where there is no natural
way to specify a selection
rule. So this was controversial and this
was described before there's even
a language for axiomatic systems.
- That's right. So on the one hand, I
mean, the axiom of choice principle is
completely obvious that we want
this to be true, that it is
true. I mean, a lot of people take
it as a law of logic. If you have
a bunch of sets, then there's a way of
picking an element from each of them.
picking an element from
each of them. There's a
function. If I have a bunch of
sets, then there's a function that,
when you apply it to any one of those
sets, gives you an element of that set.
It's- it's a completely
natural principle. I mean,
it's called the axiom of choice, which is
a way of sort of anthropomorphizing the
mathematical idea. It's not
like the function is choosing
something. I mean, it's just that
if you were to make such choices,
there would be a function that
consisted of the choices that you made.
And the difficulty is that when
you- when you can't specify a
rule or a procedure by which you're making
choices, then it's difficult to say
choices, then it's difficult to say what the
function is that you're asserting exists.
function is that you're asserting
exists. You know, you- you
want to have the view that, well, there
is a way of choosing. I don't have an
easy way to say what the function
is, but there definitely is one.
Yeah, this is the way of thinking
about the axiom of choice.
- So we're going to say the- the- the three
letters of ZFC may be a lot on this
conversation. You already mentioned-
- Right
- ...Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory, that's the
Z and the F and the C in that is this...
and the C in that is this...
Comes from this axiom of choice.
- That's right.
- So ZFC sounds like a super
technical thing, but it is the
set of axioms that's the
foundation of modern mathematics.
- Yeah, absolutely. So one should be
aware also that there's huge parts of
mathematics that don't... That pay
attention to whether the axiom of
choice is being used and they don't want to
use the axiom of choice, so they work out
the consequences that's- that are possible
without the axiom of choice or with weakened
forms of- of Zermelo-Fraenkel set
theory and so on. And that's quite
a- there's quite a vibrant amount of work
in that area. I mean, but going back to the
axiom of choice for a bit, it's maybe
interesting to- to give Russell's description
of how to think about the axiom
of choice. So Russell describes,
this rich person who has a- an infinite
closet. And in that closet, he has
infinitely many pairs of shoes
and he tells his butler to
"Please go and give me
one shoe from each pair."
And- and the butler can do this easily
because he can... For any pair of shoes, he
can just always pick the left
shoe. I mean, there's a way
of picking that we can describe.
We always take the left one or
always take the right one, or take the left
one if it's a red shoe and the right one if
it's a brown shoe or, you know.
We can invent rules that would
result in these kind of choice
functions, so we can describe
explicit choice functions. And for those
cases, you don't need the axiom of choice
you don't need the Axiom of Choice to
know that there's a choice function.
When you can describe a specific way
of choosing, then you don't need to
appeal to the axiom to
know that there's a choice
But the problematic case occurs when
you think about the infinite collection
when you think about the infinite
collection of socks that the
person has in their closet. And
if we assume that socks are
sort of indistinguishable within each
pair, you know, they match each other,
indiscernible, then the- the butler
wouldn't have any kind of rule for
which sock in each pair to pick. And so
it's not so clear that he has a way of-
of producing one sock from each pair
because... Right? So that's what's
at stake, is the question of whether
you can specify a rule by which the choice
function, you know, a rule that it obeys
that defines the choice function, or
whether there's sort of this arbitrary
choosing aspect to it. That's when
you need the axiom of choice to
know that there is such a function.
But of course, as a matter of
mathematical ontology, we might find
attractive the idea that, well,
look, I mean, I don't- not every way of
choosing the socks has to be defined
by rule. Why should everything that
exists in mathematical
reality follow a rule or a
procedure of that sort? If I have the
idea that my mathematical
ontology is rich with objects,
then I think that, that there
are all kinds of functions and
ways of choosing. Those are all part
of the mathematical reality that I
wanna be talking about.... and
so I don't have any problem
asserting the Axiom of Choice.
Yes, there is a way of choosing,
But I can't t- necessarily
tell you what it is.
But in a mathematical argument, I
can assume that I fix the choice
function because I know that
there is one. So it's a... The
philosophical difference between working
when you have the Axiom of Choice
and when you don't is the question
of this constructive nature of the
argument. So if you make an argument
and you appeal to the Axiom of Choice,
then maybe you're admitting
that the objects that
you're producing in the proof
are not gonna be constructive.
You're not gonna be able to necessarily
say specific things about them.
But if you're just claiming to make an existence
claim, that's totally fine. Whereas if you have
a constructive attitude about ma-
the nature of mathematics, and you
think that mathematical claims maybe
are only warranted when you can
provide an explicit procedure for producing
the mathematical objects that you're dealing
with then you're probably gonna wanna deny
the axiom of choice and maybe much more.
- Can we maybe speak to the axioms that
underlie ZFC? So cone of perplexity,
ZFC, or Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory with the Axiom of Choice, as we
mentioned, is the standard foundation for most
modern mathematics. It consists of
the following main axioms: Axiom
of Extensionality, Axiom of Empty
Set, Axiom of Pairing, Axiom
of Union, Axiom of Power Set,
Axiom of Infinity, Axiom of
Separation, Axiom of Replacement,
Axiom of Regularity,
and Axiom of Choice. Some of these
are quite basic, but it would be nice
to kinda give people a sense-
...of what it means to be an
axiom. Like, what kind of basic
facts we can lay on the table on which
we can build some beautiful mathematics.
- Yeah, so the history of it is really
quite fascinating. So, Zermelo introduced
most of these axioms, I mean, as part
of what's now called Zermelo set
theory, to formalize his
proof from the Axiom of
Choice to the Well-Order Principle, which
was an extremely controversial result.
So in 1904, he gave the proof without the
theory, and then he was challenged to
provide the theory. And
so in 1908, he produced
the Zermelo set theory
and gave the proof that
in that theory, you can prove that
every set admits a well ordering.
And so the axioms on the list, these
things like extensionality, express
the most fundamental principles of the
understanding of sets that he wanted
to be talking about. So for example,
extensionality says if two sets have the
same members, then they're equal. So
it's this idea that the
sets consist of the
collection of their members, and that's it.
There's nothing else that's going on in
the set. So it's just if two sets have
the same members, then they are the same
set. So it's maybe the most
primitive axiom in some respect.
- Well, there's also, just to give
a flavor, there exists a set
with no elements, called the empty
set. For any two sets, there's a
set that contains exactly
those two sets as
elements. For any set, there's a set that
contains exactly the elements of the
elements of that set, so the union
set. And then there's the power
set. For any set, there's a set
whose elements are exactly the
subsets of the original set,
the power set. In the axiom of
infinity, there exists an
infinite set, typically a set
that contains the empty set and is closed
under the operation of adding one more
element. Back to our hotel example.
- That's right.
- And there's more, but this
is kind of fascinating.
Just put yourself in the
mindset of people at
the beginning of this, of
trying to formalize set theory.
It's fascinating that humans can do that.
- I read some historical
accounts by historians about
that time period, specifically
about Zermelo's axioms and his
proof of the well-order theorem. And the
historians were saying never before in the
history of mathematics has a
mathematical theorem been argued
about so publicly and so
vociferously as that theorem of
Zermelo's. And it's fascinating also
because the axiom of choice was
widely regarded as a kind of, you
know, basic principle at first,
but then when, but people were very suspicious
of the well-order theorem because no one could
imagine a well ordering, say,
of the real numbers. And so
this was a case when Zermelo
seemed to be, from principles
that seemed quite reasonable,
proving this obvious untruth.
And so people were, mathematicians
were objecting. But then
Zermelo and others
actually looked into the
mathematical papers and so on of
some of the people who had been
objecting so vociferously,
and found, in many
cases, that they were implicitly
using the axiom of choice in their
own arguments, even though they
would argue publicly against
it. Because it's so
natural to use it because
it's such an obvious principle
in a way. I mean, it's
easy to just use it by accident
if you're not critical enough
and you don't even realize that you're using
the axiom of choice. That's true now, even.
People like to pay attention to when the
axiom of choice is used or not used in
mathematical arguments, up until
this day. It used to be more
important. In the early 20th century it was
very important because people didn't know if it
was a consistent theory or not, and
there were these antinomies arising.
and so there was a worry about
consistency of the axioms.
but then, of course, eventually,
with the result of, of
Godel and Cohen and so on, they... this
consistency question specifically about the
axiom of choice sort of falls away. We
know that the axiom of choice itself
choice itself will never be the
source of inconsistency in set
theory. If there's inconsistency with the
axiom of choice, then it's, it's already
inconsistent without the axiom of
choice. So it's not the cause of
inconsistency. And so in that... from
that point of view, the need to pay
attention to whether you're using it or not from
a consistency point of view is somehow less
important. But still there's this
reason to pay attention to it on
the grounds of these constructivist
ideas that I had mentioned earlier.
- And we should say, in set theory,
consistency means that it is impossible to
derive a contradiction from
the axioms of the theory.
It means that there are no
contradictions. That's a...
- That's right
- A consistent axiomatic system is
that there are no contradictions.
- A consistent theory is one for which you
cannot prove a contradiction from that
theory.
- Maybe a quick pause, a quick
break, a quick bathroom break.
You mentioned to me offline we were
talking about Russell's paradox and that
there's a- a nice, another kind
of anthropomorphizable proof of
uncountability. I was wondering
if you can lay that out.
- Oh yeah, sure. Absolutely.
- Both Russell's paradox and the proof.
- Right. So we talked about Cantor's proof
that the real numbers, the set of real
numbers is an uncountable infinity,
it's a strictly larger infinity than
the natural numbers. But Cantor
actually proved a- a
much more general fact,
namely that for any set
whatsoever, the power
set of that set is a strictly
larger set. So the power set
is the set containing all the subsets of
the original set. So if you have a set
and you look at the collection of all
of its subsets, then Cantor proved
that this is- this is a
bigger set. They're not
equinumerous. Of course, there's always
at least as many subsets as elements
because for any element you can
make, the- the singleton subset
that has only that guy
as a member, right? So
there's always at least as many subsets
as elements. But the question is
whether they, whether it's
strictly more or not. And so
Cantor reasoned like this. It's
very simple. It's a kind of
distilling the abstract
diagonalization idea
without being encumbered by the complexity
of the real numbers. So, we have a set X,
and we're looking at all of its
subsets. That's the power set of X.
Suppose that X and the power
set of X have the same
size. Suppose, towards contradiction,
they have the same size.
So that means we can associate to
every individual of X a subset.
And so now let me define a new
set. Another set, I'm going to
define it. Let's call it
D. And D is the subset
of X that contains all the individuals that
are not in their set. Every individual
was associated with a subset of X, and
I'm looking at the individuals that
are not in their set.
Maybe nobody's like that. Maybe there's
no element of X that's like that,
or maybe they're all like that, or maybe
some of them are and some of them aren't.
It doesn't really matter for the
argument. I defined a subset
D consisting of the individuals
that are not in the set that's
attached to them, but that's a
perfectly good subset. And so
because of the equinumerosity, it would have
to be attached to a particular individual,
you know? And- ...but that...
let's call that person, it should
be a name starting with D, so Diana.
And now we ask, is Diana
an element of D or not?
But if Diana is an element
of D, then she is in her
set. So she shouldn't be because the
set D was the set of individuals
that are not in their set.
So if Diana is in D, then she
shouldn't be. But if she isn't in
D, then she wouldn't be in her
set. And so she should be in D.
That's a contradiction.
So therefore, the number
of subsets is always greater than
the number of elements for any set.
And the anthropomorphizing
idea is the following.
I'd like to talk about it
this way. For any collection
of people, you can form
more committees from them
than there are people, even if
you have infinetely many people.
Suppose you have an infinite
set of people. And what's a
committee? Well, a committee is just a
list of who's on the committee, basically.
The members of the committee. So
there's all the two-person committees
and there's all the one-person
committees, and there's the universal,
the worst committee, the one that
everyone is on. Okay. The best committee
is the empty committee. With no members
and never meets and so on. Or is the empty
committee meeting all
the time? I'm not sure.
- Yeah. That's... wow, that's
a profound question.
And does a committee with just
one member meet also as a-
- Yeah, maybe it's always
in session. I don't know.
So the claim is that there are
more committees than people.
Okay. Suppose not. Well, then we
could make an association between the
people and the committees. So
we would have every committee
could be named after a
person in a one-to-one way.
And I'm not saying that the person is on
the committee that's named after them,
or not on it, whatever. Maybe sometimes that
happens, sometimes it doesn't. I don't know.
It doesn't matter. But let's form what I
call committee D, which consists of all the
people that are not on the
committee that's named after them.
Okay. Maybe that's everyone, maybe it's no
one, maybe it's half the people. It doesn't
matter. That's a committee. It's a set of
people. And so it has to be named after
someone. Let's call that person
Daniella. So now we ask, is
Daniella on the committee
that's named after her?
Well, if she is, then she
shouldn't be because it was the
committee of people who aren't
on their own committee.
And if she isn't, then she
should be. So again, it's a
contradiction. So when I was teaching at
Oxford, one of my students came up with the
following different
anthropomorphization of Cantor's
argument. Let's consider
all possible fruit
salads. We have a given
collection of fruits.
You know, apples and oranges and grapes,
whatever. And a fruit salad consists of
some collection of those fruits. So
there's the banana, pear, grape salad and
so on. There are a lot of different
kinds of salad. Every set of fruits
makes a salad, a fruit
salad. Okay. And we want to
prove that for any collection of
fruits, even if there are infinitely
many different kinds of
fruit, for any collection
of fruits, there are more possible
fruit salads than there are fruits.
So if not, then you can put a
one-to-one correspondence between the
fruits and the fruit salads,
so you could name every fruit
salad after a fruit. That
fruit might not be in
that salad, it doesn't matter. We're just...
it's a naming, a one-to-one correspondence.
And then, of course, we form the
diagonal salad, which consists
of all the fruits that are not in
the salad that's named after them.
And that's a perfectly
good salad. It might be
the kind of diet salad, if it was the
empty salad, or it might be the universal
salad
which had all fruits in it, if all the fruits
were in it. Or it might have just some and
not all. So that diagonal salad
would have to be named after
some fruit. So let's suppose
it's named after durian,
meaning that it was associated with durian
in the one-to-one correspondence. And then
we ask, well, is durian in the salad that
it's named after? And if it is, then it
shouldn't be. And if it isn't, then it
should be. And so it's again the same
contradiction. So all of those
arguments are just the same as
Cantor's proof that the
power set of any set is
bigger than the set. And this
is exactly the same logic
that comes up in Russell's paradox,
because Russell is arguing
that the class of all sets can't be a set,
because if it were, then we could form the
the set of all sets that are
not elements of themselves.
So basically, what Russell is
proving is that there are more
collections of sets than
elements. Because we can form the
diagonal class, you know, the
class of all sets that are not
elements of themselves. If that
were a set, then it would be an
element of itself if and only if it
was not an element of itself. It's
exactly the same logic in all
four of those arguments. Yeah.
So there can't be a class of all sets, because if
there were, then there would have to be a class of all
sets that aren't elements
of themselves. But that set
would be an element of itself if and only if
it's not an element of itself, which is a
contradiction. So this is the essence of
the Russell paradox. I don't call it the
Russell paradox. Actually, when I teach it,
I call it Russell's theorem. There's no
universal set. And it's not really
confusing anymore. At the time, it was very
confusing, but now we've absorbed this
nature of set theory into our
fundamental understanding of how sets
are, and it's not confusing anymore. I mean,
the history is fascinating though about
the Russell paradox, because before that
time, Frege was working
on his monumental work
undertaking, implementing the
philosophy of logicism, which is
the attempt to reduce all
of mathematics to logic.
So Frege wanted to give an
account of all of mathematics in
terms of logical notions, and he
was writing this monumental work
and had formulated his basic
principles. And those
principles happened to
imply that for any property whatsoever, you
could form the set of objects with that
property. This is known as the
general comprehension principle. And
he was appealing to the principles
that support that axiom,
throughout his work. I
mean, it wasn't just an
incidental thing. He was really using this
principle. And Russell wrote him a letter
when he observed the work
in progress, that there was
this problem, because if you accept the principle
that for any property whatsoever, you can make
a set of objects with that property,
then you could form the set of
all sets that are not members
of themselves. That's just an
instance of the general
comprehension principle. And
the set of all sets that aren't elements of
themselves can't be a set, because if it
were, then it would be an element of
itself if and only if it's not a member of
itself, and that's a contradiction.
And so Russell wrote this letter to
Frege, and it was just at the moment
when Frege was finishing his work.
It was already at the publishers
and, you know, in press
basically. But it's
completely devastating. I
mean, it must have been such a
horrible situation for
Frege to be placed in
because he's finished this
monumental work, you know,
years of his life dedicated to
this, and Russell finds this
basically one-line proof of a contradiction
in the fundamental principles of
the thesis that completely
destroys the whole system. And
Frege had put in the
appendix of his work a
response to Russell's letter in which he
explained what happened, and he wrote
very gracefully, "Hardly anything
more unwelcome can befall a
scientific writer than to have one of the
foundations of his edifice shaken after the
work is finished. This is the position
into which I was put by a letter from
Mr. Bertrand Russell as the
printing of this volume was nearing
completion." And then he goes on to explain
the matter, it concerns his basic law
five, and so on, and...
- It's heartbreaking. I mean,
there's nothing more traumatic to
a person who dreams of constructing
mathematics all from logic.
to get a very clean, simple
contradiction. I mean, that's just...
- You devote your life to this work, and
then it's shown to be contradictory, and
that must have been heartbreaking.
- What do you think about the Frege
project, the philosophy of logic,
the dream of the power of logic-
- Right
- ... to construct a mathematical universe?
- So, of course, the project
of logicism did not die with
Frege, and it was continued,
and, you know, there's a whole
movement, the neologicists and
so on, in contemporary times
even. But my view of the
matter is that, really, we
should view the main goals of logicism
are basically completely fulfilled
in the rise of set-theoretic
foundationalism. I mean,
When you view ZFC as the foundation of
mathematics, and in my view, the principles of
ZFC are fundamentally illogical in
character including the axiom of
choice, as I mentioned, as a
principle of logic. This is a
highly disputed point of view, though, cause
a lot of people take even the axiom of
infinity as inherently mathematical and
not logical and so on. But I
think if you adopt the view
that the principles of ZFC have
to do with the principles of
abstract, you know, set
formation, which is fundamentally
logical in character, then
it's complete success for
logicism. So the fact that set theory
is able to serve as a foundation
means that mathematics
can be founded on logic.
- I think this is a good moment to
talk about Gödel's incompleteness
theorems. So, can you explain
them and what do they teach
us about the nature of mathematical truth?
- Absolutely. It's one of the most
profound developments in mathematical
logic. I mean, the
incompleteness theorems is when
mathematical logic, in my view,
first became sophisticated.
It's a kind of birth of the
subject of mathematical
logic. But to understand the theorems,
you really have to start a little
bit earlier with Hilbert's program.
because at that time, you know, with the Russell Paradox
and so on, there were these various contradictions
popping up in various parts of
set theory and the Burali-Forti
paradox and so on. And, and Hilbert was
famously supportive of set theory. I mean,
there's this quote of him saying, "No one
shall cast us from the paradise
that Cantor has created for
us." And what I take him
to mean by that is he was
so captured by the idea of using
set theory as a foundation
of mathematics and it was so powerful
and convenient and unifying in a
way that was extremely important. And
he wasn't, he didn't wanna give that
up, despite the danger of these
paradoxes, these contradictions, basically,
is how some people viewed them. And so,
- this minefield of paradoxes. Yeah.
- Right. A minefield. That's a really good
way of describing the situation. And
so Hilbert said, "Well,
look, we have to fix this
problem, you know. We wanna use the
set theory foundations, but we want to
do it in a way that is trustworthy
and reliable. We can't
allow that the foundations
of mathematics are in
question. You know, this is a kind of
attitude, I think, that underlies Hilbert
and the Hilbert program.
And so he proposed, "Look,
we're going to have this strong theory,
this set theory that we want to be proving
our theorems in but I
I mean, on the one hand, we want it
to be as strong as possible. We would
like it to answer all the
questions." There's another
famous quote of Hilbert in
his retirement address where,
he proclaims, "Wir müssen wissen, wir
werden wissen." So, "We must
know, we will know," in
which he's very optimistic
about the ability of
mathematics to answer all of the
questions of mathematics that
we have posed. We have all these problems
we want to solve and he is saying,
"We're going to do it. We're going to solve all these
problems." So we want to propose this strong theory
and one has the sense
that he had in mind set
theory in which all the
questions are going to be
answered. Okay? But secondly, we
want to combine that with, in a very
weak arithmetic, purely finitistic
theory, we want to prove
that the reasoning process
of the strong theory is
safe. Okay? So in order to make
sense of that point of view, you
basically have to invent the philosophy of
formalism, where we can look at what is a
proof, what is the nature of mathematical
reasoning. And on Hilbert's
way of thinking about
this, a proof is basically itself a
finitistic kind of object. It's a sequence
of... If you think about the nature of
what a proof is, it's a sequence of
assertions which can be viewed
as sort of sequences of symbols
that conform with certain
rules of logical reasoning.
And this is a formalist way of
understanding the nature of
proof. So we think about a proof
in a kind of syntactic, formal
way. Even though the contents
of those statements might be
referring to infinite uncountable objects,
the statements themselves are not infinite
uncountable objects. The statements themselves are
just finite sequences of symbols.
- So when you think of proof as, maybe
it's fair to say, almost like a
outside of math. It's like, tools
operating on math. And then for
Hilbert, he thought proof is inside the
axiomatic system. Something like this.
- Yeah, that's helpful.
- That's wild.
- The main thing about formalism is that you
think of the process of doing
mathematics. You divorce it
from the meaning of the mathematical
assertions, right? So the
meaning of the mathematical assertions
that you make in this infinitary theory
has to do with these huge uncountable
infinities and so on possibly.
And that's a very sort of uncertain realm
maybe and the source of the paradoxes
and so on in some people's
minds. But the reasoning
process itself consists of
writing down sequences of symbols
on your page and, you
know, undertaking or,
an argument with them which is
following these finitary rules. And so,
if we divorce the meaning of the
symbols from just the process of
manipulating the symbols, it's a way of
looking at the nature of mathematics
as a kind of formal game in which-
the meaning may be totally absent.
I don't think it's necessarily
part of the formalist view that there
is no meaning behind, but rather it's
emphasizing that we can
divorce the meaning of
the sentences from the process
of manipulating those sentences.
And then Hilbert wanted to
prove in this purely finitary
theory that if we follow the
rules of that game, we're
never going to get a contradiction.
So those were the two aims of
the Hilbert program, is to
found the strong infinitary
theory, probably set
theory, which is going to answer
all the questions. And then
secondly, prove in the finitary
theory that the strong theory is
safe. In other words, consistent, yeah?
- What does the word "finitary"
in finitary theory mean?
- Yeah. Well, this is, of course,
philosophically contentious, and people
have different ideas about what exactly
it should mean. So there's hundreds
of papers on exactly that question.
But I like to take it just kind of
informally. I mean, it means that we're
talking about finite sequences of
symbols, and we're going to
have a theory, you know, finite
strings of symbols. A
finitary theory would be
one whose subject matter is about
those kinds of things so that we
can conceivably argue about the nature
of these finite strings. A proof is
just a finite sequence of statements,
so that every statement is either
one of the axioms or follows
by the laws of logic from the
earlier statements in some specified
manner, like using modus ponens or
some other law of logic like that.
And such that the last line on the
list is, you know, the theorem
that you're proving. So that's what a
proof is in this kind of way of thinking.
To take a specific example, I mean, I
always conceive of the, perhaps the
most natural finitary theory
that one would be called upon to
exhibit would be Peano arithmetic, the
theory of Peano arithmetic, which-
which is a first order
theory of the nature of
arithmetic. But okay, so some
people say, "Well, Peano
arithmetic has these strong first order
induction axioms, and there's much,
much weaker versions of arithmetic,
like I-sigma-naught or I-sigma-1 and
so on, which are even
more finitary than Peano
arithmetic." So different
philosophical positions take different
attitudes about what is, what does it
take to be finitary? How finitary do you
have to be to be truly finitary?
- So according to Perplexity, Peano
arithmetic is a foundational system for
formalizing the properties and operations
of natural numbers using a set of
axioms called the Peano axioms.
Peano arithmetic provides a
formal language and axioms for
arithmetic operations, such as
addition and multiplication over the
natural numbers. The axioms define the
existence of a first natural
number, usually zero or
one, the concept of a successor
function, which generates
the next natural number, rules for addition
and multiplication built from these
concepts, the principle of induction
allowing proofs around all
natural numbers, and it goes on. So it's
a very particular kind of arithmetic
that is finitary.
- You know, in my... I view it as finitary, but this
is a contentious view. Not everyone agrees with
that. That's what I was trying to hint at.
- Okay. I got it. All right.
- Peano arithmetic is one of the
hugely successful theories
of the natural numbers and
elementary number theory.
Essentially, all of
classical number theory, so
whatever kind of theorems you want to
be proving about the prime numbers or
factorization or any kind
of finitary reasoning about
finite combinatorial objects,
all of it can be formalized in
Peano arithmetic. I mean,
that's the basic situation. Of
course, one has to qualify those statements
in light of the Gödel incompleteness
theorem, but for the most part, the
classical number theoretic analysis of
the finite numbers is almost entirely
developable inside Peano arithmetic.
So if we go back to the Hilbert program,
so Hilbert has these two goals:
produce the strong theory which is going
to answer all the questions, and then
prove by purely finitary means
that that theory will never lead
into contradiction. And one
can think about, well, the incompleteness
theorem should be viewed as a
decisive refutation of the
Hilbert program. It defeats
both of those goals decisively,
completely. But before explaining
that, maybe one should think about, you know,
what if Hilbert had been right? What would
be the nature of mathematics in the world
that Hilbert is telling us to search for?
- And if I may, going to Perplexity's
definition of Hilbert's
program, it was David Hilbert's early
20th century project to give all
of classical mathematics a
completely secure finitary
foundation. In essence, the
goal was to formalize all of
mathematics in precise
axiomatic systems and then
prove using only very
elementary finitary reasoning
about symbols that these systems
are free of contradiction.
- Right. Exactly right. Let's imagine
what it would be like if he had been
right. So we would have
this finitary theory,
and it would prove that the strong
theory was free of contradiction.
So we could start enumerating proofs from
the strong theory. Right now, we can
write a computer program that would
systematically generate all possible proofs
from a given theory. And so we
could have, like, this theorem
enumeration machine that would just
spit out theorems all day long in such
a manner that every single theorem would
eventually be produced by this device.
And so if you had a mathematical question
of any kind, you could answer it by just
waiting for either the
answer to come out yes
or from the machine or the
answer to come out no. So
the nature of mathematical
investigation in Hilbert's world
is one of just turning the crank
of the theorem enumeration
machine, devoid of creative thinking or
imagination, it's just getting
the answer from this by rote.
procedure. So Hilbert, in effect, is telling
us, I mean, with his program, that the
fundamental nature of mathematics is
rote computation. I mean, the way I
think about the Hilbert program
seems extremely attractive in the
historical context of being
worried about the antinomies,
the inconsistencies, and so
how can we kind of block them?
It seems natural, first of all, to have
a strong theory that's going to answer
all the questions, because the
idea of logical independence and
pervasiveness that we now know exists
just wasn't, you know, there was
no known. They didn't know
anything like that happening ever.
And so it's natural to think that
it wouldn't happen, and also
that they would be able to guard against
this inconsistency. So it seems like the
goals of the Hilbert program are quite
natural in that historical context.
But, you know, when you think a little more
about what the nature of it would be like,
it shows you this kind of rote procedure.
And now you're saying, well, that
doesn't seem so unlikely maybe,
I mean, in the light of the
increasing computer power and so on,
it's actually maybe turning into
our everyday experience, where the
machines are calculating more and more for
us in a way that could be alarming.
Okay. But, okay, so to talk about the
alternative to the Hilbert
point of view, I mean, if he's
wrong, then what is the nature of
mathematical reality? Well, it would mean
that we couldn't ever maybe,
for the first goal, we
couldn't ever write down a
theory that answered all the
questions. So we would always be in
a situation where our best theory,
even the infinitary theories,
would have questions that they stumble
with and are unable to answer.
Independence would occur.
But then also, because of
the failure of the second
goal, we would also have to be
constantly worrying about whether our theories
were consistent or not, and we wouldn't
have any truly convincing means of
saying that they were free
from contradiction. And
the fact of Gödel's Incompleteness Theorem
shows that that is exactly the nature of
mathematical reality, actually. Those
are the two incompleteness theorems.
So the first incompleteness
theorem says you cannot write
down a computably axiomatizable
theory that answers all the
questions. Every such
theory will be incomplete,
assuming it includes a certain
amount of arithmetic. And
secondly, no such theory can ever prove
its own consistency. So not only is
it the case that the finitary theory
can't prove the consistency of the
strong infinitary theory, but even
the infinitary theory can't prove
its own consistency, right?
That's the second incompleteness
theorem. And so it's, in that sense,
a decisive takedown of the Hilbert
program, which is really
quite remarkable, the
extent to which his theorem
just really answered that
whole puzzle. It's quite amazing.
I mean, there's another aspect,
kind of easy to think about.
I mean, if you're wondering
about theories that prove their
own consistency, then, I mean,
would you trust a theory
that proves of itself
that it's consistent? I
mean, that's like... it's
like the used car salesman
telling you, "Oh, I'm trustworthy."
I mean, it's not a reason
to trust the used car salesman,
is it? Just because he says that.
So similarly, if you have a theory that
proves its own consistency, well, even an
inconsistent theory would prove its
own consistency. And so it doesn't
seem to be a logical reason to believe
in the consistency, if you have a
theory that proves itself consistent.
- Just for clarification,
you used the word theory.
Is it, in this context,
synonymous with axiomatic system?
- Right. So in mathematical logic,
"theory" is a technical term.
And it means any set of sentences
in a formal language. And so
if you say axiomatic system,
it's basically synonymous to my
usage with theory. So a
theory means, you know, the
consequences of a set of axioms or... People
are sometimes unclear on whether they just mean
the axioms or the consequences
of the axioms, but...
- So theory includes both the axioms
and the consequences of the
axioms, and you use it interchangeably
and the context is supposed to
help you figure out which of the two
you're talking about? The axioms
or the consequences? Or maybe to
you, they're basically the same?
- Yeah, well, they're so closely connected,
although all the features aren't the same.
So if you have a computable list
of axioms for a theory, then you
can start enumerating
the consequences of the
axioms, but you won't be
able to computably decide
whether a given statement is a
consequence or not. You can enumerate the
consequences, so you can semi-decide the
consequences, but you won't be able to
decide yes or no whether a given statement
is a consequence or not.
So it's the distinction between a
problem being computably decidable and a
problem being computably
enumerable, which,
was made clear following the
work of Turing and others
that came from that. I mean, so that's
one difference between the list of
axioms of the theory and the
theory itself. The axioms could
be... You can decide, maybe computably,
whether something is an axiom or not, but
that doesn't mean that you can decide computably
whether or not something is a theorem
or not. Usually, you only
get to decide the positive
instances. If something is a theorem, you will eventually
come to recognize that, but if something isn't
a theorem, maybe at no point will you be
able to say, "No, that's not a theorem."
- And that's of course connected
to the halting problem.
...and all of these
contradictions and paradoxes are
all nicely, beautifully interconnected.
So can we just linger on
Gödel's incompleteness theorem?
You mentioned the two components there.
You know, there's so many questions to
ask, like what is the difference between
provability and truth?
What is true and what
is provable? Maybe that's
a good line to draw.
- Yeah, this is a really
core distinction that
it's fascinating to me to go back and read
even the early 20th century
people before Gödel and Tarski,
and they were totally sloppy
about this distinction
between truth and proof.
It wasn't clear at all
until Gödel, basically.
Although even as late as
Bourbaki has the kind of confusion in this
foundational work. So, this
standard graduate-level
textbook used in France in the presentation
of logic, they are conflating truth and
proof. To be true for them
means to be provable. So, in
the early days, maybe it wasn't clear
enough that the concept of truth
needed a mathematical investigation or
analysis. Maybe it was already
taken to be fully clear.
But because of the incompleteness theorem,
we realized that actually there's quite
subtle things happening, right?
And so, why don't we talk about
this distinction a bit? To me, it's
absolutely core and fundamental
to our understanding of
mathematical logic now.
This distinction between
truth and proof. So, truth is
on the semantic side of the
syntax-semantics dichotomy.
Truth has to do with the
nature of reality. I
mean, okay, when I talk about reality,
I'm not talking about physical reality.
I'm talking about mathematical reality.
So, we have a concept of something being
true in a structure, a statement being
true in a mathematical structure.
Like maybe you have the real field or something,
and you want to know, does it satisfy this
statement or that statement? Or you
have a group of some kind, or maybe
you have a graph. This is a particular
kind of mathematical structure
that has a bunch of vertices
and edges, and you want to know
does this graph satisfy
that statement? And
Tarski gave this absolutely
wonderful account of the
nature of truth in what's now
known as the disquotational
theory of truth. And what Tarski says
is the sentence, "Snow is white,"
is true if and only if snow is white. And
what he means by that is, look, to say
truth is a property of an assertion,
so we can think of the assertion as it
syntactically. So, the sentence is true
if and only if the content of
the sentence is the case. You
know? So, the sentence, "Snow is white,"
you know, in quotations is true, that
just means that snow is white. And
that's why it's called the disquotational
theory because we remove the quotation marks.
from the assertion, right?
And you can use this idea of
disquotation to give a formal
definition of truth in a
mathematical structure of a statement in
a formal language. So, for example, if I
have a formal language that allows
me to make atomic statements
about the objects and relations of the
structure, and I can build up a
formal language with, you know,
with the logical connectives
of "and" and "or" and
"implies" and "not" and so on, and
maybe I have quantifiers, right? Then,
for example, to say that
the structure satisfies phi
and psi, that that single statement, phi
and psi, I'm thinking of that as one
statement, just means that it satisfies phi
and it satisfies psi. And if
you notice what happened there,
I... At first, the 'and' was
part of the sentence inside the
sentence, but then in the second
part, I was using the word
'and' to refer to the conjunction
of the two conditions. So-
- Yeah, it has the disquotation.
And so this idea can be done for all the
logical connectors and quantifiers and
everything. You're applying
Tarski's idea of disquotation,
and it allows you to define
by induction the truth of any
assertion in a formal language inside
any mathematical structure. And
so to say that a sentence is true,
first of all, it's ambiguous
unless you tell me which structure
you're talking about it being true in.
And so maybe we have in mind the
standard model of arithmetic
or something with the natural numbers and the arithmetic
structure, and I want to know is a given statement
true in that structure. Then we have a
formal definition of what that means
according to the Tarski recursive
definition of truth. Okay, that's
truth. Proof, on the other
hand, is, you know, in
this Hilbert way of thinking, we
can develop proof theory. What is
a proof for a mathematician,
for a mathematical logician? A
proof is a certain sequence or arrangement
of sentences in the formal language that
accord with the logical rules of a proof
system. So there are certain
modes of reasoning that are
allowed. So if you know A
and you know A implies B in
the proof, then at a later
step you're allowed to
write B as a consequence. So if you know A
and you know A implies B, those are both
two statements that are known, then
you can deduce B as a consequence
according to the rule of modus
ponens. This is the rule of modus ponens.
And, you know, there are a lot of other
rules. Some people would call this
implication elimination. There are
different kinds of proof systems.
There are a lot of different formal
proof systems that exist that are studied by
the proof theorists, and all of them have
the property that they're
sound, which means
that if the premises of
the argument are all
true in a structure and
you have a proof to get a
conclusion, then the conclusion is
also true in that structure. So
that's what it means to be sound.
Proofs preserve truth. They're truth-
preserving arguments. Okay?
But also the proof systems are
also generally complete. They're both
sound and complete, and complete
means that whenever a statement is a
consequence, a logical consequence of some
other statements, which means that
whenever the assumptions are true, then
then the consequence is
also true in the structure.
So whenever you have a logical
consequence, then there is a proof of
it. Okay? And the proof systems generally
have both of those properties; they're sound and
complete. There's a third property a lot of logicians
talk about
sound and complete, sound and complete this, sound
and complete that. But actually, there's a hidden
third adjective that they should always be
talking about in any such case, which is
that you should be able
to recognize whether or
whether or not something is a proof or
not. So there's a computable aspect
to the proof systems. We want to be able
to recognize whether something is a proof.
It should be computably decidable whether
a given sequence of statements is a proof
or not. So we don't want
a proof system in which
someone claims to have a proof, but
we can't check that fact, whether
it's a proof or not. We want to
be able to correctly adjudicate
all claims to having a proof.
- Yeah. A mathematician comes to mind that
said he has a proof, but the margins are
too small
- That's right.
- to continue.
- Exactly. So
- So that doesn't count as a proof.
- Yeah. So generally, all the classical
proof systems that are used are sound
and complete and also computably decidable
in the sense that we can decide whether
something is a proof or not.
- So what is, again, the tension
between truth and proof?
Which is more powerful, and
how do the two interplay
with the contradictions
that we've been discussing?
- Right. So the incompleteness
theorem is the question whether we
could, say, write down a theory
for arithmetic. Say, for the standard model
of arithmetic where we have the natural
numbers and plus and times and zero,
one, and less than, and so on.
In that formal language, we can
express an enormous number of
statements about the nature not
only of arithmetic, but actually by
various coding methods, we can
express essentially all of finite
mathematics in that structure.
So the question would be, can
we write down a computable list
of axioms that will answer
all those questions by proof?
In other words, we want to
have a complete theory, a theory of
arithmetic that proves all and only the true
statements. That would be the goal. Hilbert
would love that. I mean, that would
be supportive of Hilbert's
program to have such a complete
theory of arithmetic, and
Godel proved that this is
impossible. You cannot write down a
computable list of axioms that is complete
in that sense. There will always
be statements... If the theory is
consistent, there will always be statements
that you cannot prove and you cannot
refute. So they are
independent of that theory.
- How traumatic is that, that there are statements
that are independent from the theory?
- I mean, my view is that this isn't
traumatic at all. This is rather
completely eye-opening in terms of our
understanding of the nature of
mathematical reality. I mean, we're not...
We understand this profound fact about our
situation with regard
to mathematical truth.
The incompleteness theorem tells us,
look, we just can't write down a list of
axioms that is going to be consistent and
it's going to answer all the questions.
It's impossible. And so I
don't think of it as trauma.
I just think, look, this is the nature of
mathematical reality and it's good that
we know it, and so now we need to
move on from that. And, you know,
do what we can in light of that.
- Is it fair to say that in
general it means if I give you a
statement, you can't know if your axiomatic
system would be able to prove it?
- That's right. In general, you
cannot. The provability problem,
we can formulate it as a decision
problem. Given a theory and given a
statement, is that statement a
consequence of that theory? Yeah.
This is one of the most famous decision
problems. In fact, the very first one,
because it's equivalent
to the Hilbert-Ackermann
Entscheidungsproblem, which is
also appearing in the title of
Turing's 1936 paper that was so important
for computability theory. So, it's a
formulation of the Entscheidungsproblem.
Does a given theory
have a given statement as a logical
consequence? Which, because
of Gödel's completeness theorem, not his
incompleteness theorem, but his earlier
completeness theorem, Gödel had proved
that the proof systems that they
studied did have this completeness
property that I mentioned. So provability
is the same as logical consequence.
And this is an undecidable decision
problem. Turing proved and we now know
it's equivalent to the Halting Problem.
- Can you describe the Halting Problem?
Because it's a thing that shows up in a
very useful and, again, traumatic
way through a lot of computer
science, through a lot of mathematics.
- Yeah. The Halting Problem
is expressing a fundamental
property of computational processes. So,
given a program, or maybe we think of it
as a program together with its input,
but let me just call it a program. So
given a program, we could run that
program, but I want to
pose it as a decision
problem. Will this
program ever complete its
task? Will it ever halt? And the
Halting Problem is the question, given
a program, will it halt? Yes
or no? And, of course, for
any one instance, the answer's either
yes or no. That's not what we're talking
about. We're talking about whether
there's a computable procedure to answer
all instances of this question.
So, it's a decision problem is
given as a scheme of instances for all
possible programs that you could ask
about. What I want to know is, is there
a computable procedure that will answer
those questions?
And it turns out the answer's no.
The Halting Problem is computably
undecidable. There is no computable
procedure that will correctly
answer all instances of whether a given
program will halt. And of course, we can
get half the answers in the sense that
you give me a program and you say,
"Will this halt?" And I could take that
program and I could run it.
And I could keep running it,
and maybe in a week, it would
halt. And at that time,
I could say, "Yes, it
halted." So I can get the yes answers
correctly for halting, all the yes answers.
But the problem is
if it didn't halt yet, like maybe I
waited, you know, a thousand years
and it still hasn't halted,
I don't seem entitled to say, "No,
it's not going to halt." Yet, because
maybe in a thousand and one years,
it'll halt. And so at no point can I
seem to say, "No." In order to
say, "No, it won't ever halt," it
seems like I would have to really
understand how the program
worked and what it was doing.
So giving the "yes" answers was sort of trivial.
You didn't have to understand it. You just needed
to run it, which is a kind of rote
task. But to give the "no" answers,
you need to have a kind of deep insight into
the nature of the program and what it's
doing in such a way that you would understand
it and be able to see, "Oh, no, I can
see this program is never gonna halt."
Because, you know, it's a much more
difficult task to say, "No, it won't
halt," than it is to say, "Yes,
it halted because I ran it
and it halted." And it turns
out to be impossible to have a
computable procedure that gives
the "no" answers, you know? And the argument
is not very difficult. Should we do it?
- Yes, let's do it.
- Okay. Suppose toward contradiction.
I mean, all these proofs are by
contradiction, and this argument is going
to be a diagonal argument in the same
style as the Russell argument
and the Cantor argument and
Gödel's argument that we haven't
talked about yet. So many diagonal
arguments come in. So
suppose towards contradiction that we had a
procedure for determining whether a given program
halted on a given input. Now, let me
describe. I'm gonna use that procedure
as a subroutine in the
following process. And
my process, let's call it Q,
process Q, and it takes as input
a program P, okay? And the first thing
it does is it asks that subroutine,
"Hey, would P halt if I ran it on
P itself?" Okay, that's the diagonal part
because we're applying P to P, right?
Okay, so I'm describing program
Q, and program Q takes as input
P, which is itself a program. And
the first thing it does is it asks
the halting subroutine
program, "Would P halt on
P?" And if the answer comes
back from the subroutine,
"Yeah, that would halt,"
then what I do in program Q
is I immediately jump into
an infinite loop. So I don't
halt. If P halts on P, I don't halt.
But if the answer came back, "No,
P is never gonna halt on P," then
I halt immediately. Okay, so and
that's it. I've described what Q does.
And the thing about Q is that Q's
behavior on P was the opposite of P's
behavior on P. I mean, that's how we
designed Q specifically so that Q on P
had the opposite behavior
as P on P. Okay, so
now, of course, what do we
do? Well, the same thing that
Russell did and so forth, and Cantor,
we ask, "Well, what would Q do on
Q?" And because of this opposite behavior,
Q would halt on Q if and
only if Q does not halt on
Q, which is a contradiction, because Q
has to have the opposite behavior on
Q than Q does, but that's
just contradictory.
- What a beautiful proof. Simple.
- It's absolutely beautiful. Yeah,
I agree. And it's following the
same logic of Russell and
Cantor. I mean, going back to
Cantor basically, because Russell
is also quoting Cantor in
Cantor basically, because Russell is also quoting
Cantor in his letter to Frege. So, therefore, the
conclusion is that the halting
problem is not computably
decidable. And now we can
immediately prove Godel's
decidable. And now we can immediately prove Gödel's theorem using this,
actually. It's an immediate consequence. So why don't we just do that?
I view this as the simplest proof
I view this as the simplest proof of Gödel's
theorem. You don't need the Gödel sentence to
prove Gödel's theorem. You can do it
with the halting problem. So, suppose
that we could write down a
computable axiomatization of all
that we could write down a computable axiomatization of all of
the true facts of elementary mathematics, meaning arithmetic
and finite combinatorial
things such as Turing
and finite combinatorial things such as Turing
machine computations and so on. So in fact, all those
finite combinatorial processes are
formalizable inside arithmetic with the
finite combinatorial processes are formalizable inside arithmetic
with the standard arithmetization coding process. But let
me just be a little bit informal and say
suppose we could write down a complete
me just be a little bit informal and say, suppose we could
write down a complete theory of elementary finite mathematics.
So we have a, an
axiomatization of that theory.
So we have an axiomatization of that theory. Then
we could produce all possible theorems from those
axioms in the way that I
was describing earlier with
axioms in the way that I was describing earlier with Hilbert's
program. I mean, if we had a complete theory of elementary
mathematics, we could construct a
theorem enumeration machine that
mathematics, we could construct a theorem enumeration machine
that produced all the theorems and only the theorems from that
theory.... so now, I have this theorem
enumeration device on my desk, and I announce
theory. So now I have this theorem enumeration device on my desk, and I announce
that I'm open for business to solve the halting problem. So you give me a program
and input that you wanna
run that program on,
and input that you want to run that program on, and I'm going to
answer the halting problem. And the way I'm going to do it is I'm just
gonna wait for the
going to wait for the statement coming out of the
theorem enumeration device that asserts either that
P does halt on that input or I wait
for the statement that P does not
P does halt on that input or I wait for the statement that P does not
halt on that input. But one of them's going to happen because it was a
complete theory that was enumerating
all the true statements of elementary
complete theory that was enumerating all the true statements of elementary
mathematics. So therefore, if I had such a system, I could solve the halting
problem, but we already proved that
you cannot solve the halting problem,
problem, but we already proved that you cannot solve the halting
problem, so therefore you cannot have such a complete theory of
arithmetic. So that
proves Gödel's theorem.
- Maybe to take a little bit of a tangent, can you speak... You've
written a wonderful book about proofs and the art of mathematics.
So what can you say about proving stuff
in mathematics? What is the process of
say about proving stuff in
mathematics? What is the process of
proof? What are the tools? What is
the art? What is the science of
proving things in mathematics?
- proving things in mathematics? So this is
something that I find so wonderful to teach young
mathematicians who are learning
how to become mathematicians and
mathematicians who are learning how to become mathematicians and
learning about proof, and I wrote that book when I was teaching such a
proofwriting class in New York.
proofwriting class in New York. So many universities have
such a course, the proofreading course, which is usually
taken by students who have
learned some mathematics.
taken by students who have learned some mathematics. Usually, they've
completed maybe the calculus sequence and are making the kind of
transition to higher mathematics,
which tends to involve
much more proof, and it's a kind
of challenging step for them.
Many math departments have this kind
of course on proofwriting where the
students would get exposed to
how to write proofs. I wasn't
happy with most of the other
books that exist for those
kind of courses, and the reason was
that they were so often so dull because
they would concentrate on, like, these-
totally uninteresting parts
of what it's like to write a
proof, these kind of mechanistic
procedures about how to write a proof.
You know, if you're going to prove an
implication, then you assume the hypothesis
and argue for the conclusion, and so on.
And all of that is true and fine and that's
good to know, except if that's all that you're
saying about the nature of proof,
then I don't think you're really
learning very much. So I felt
that it was possible to have a
much better kind of book,
one that was much more
interesting and that had
interesting theorems in
it that still admitted of
elementary proof. So I wrote this
book and tried to fill it with all of the
compelling mathematical
statements with very elementary
proofs that exhibited lots
of different proof styles in
it. And so, I found that the
students appreciated it a lot.
- We should say, we dedicate the
book to my students, may all their
theorems be true, proved by elegant
arguments that flow effortlessly from
hypothesis to conclusion while revealing
fantastical mathematical beauty.
Are there some interesting
proofs that maybe illustrate,
for people outside of mathematics or
for people who just take math classes-
- Right
- ...in high school and so on?
- Yeah, let's do a proof.
There's one in the book.
We can talk about it. I think
it's a nice problem. It's in
the discrete math, yeah,
the 5.1, that one,
more pointed at than pointing.
Okay. So this is the
following problem. Suppose
you're gathered with some
friends, you know, in a
circle, and you can point
at each other however you want,
or yourself, whatever, it doesn't
matter, and you can point at more than one
person, you know, use all your fingers or
your feet or whatever you want. So maybe
you point at three of your friends or
something and they point at two or three of
their friends or whatever, and one person
is pointing at 10 people and somebody isn't
pointing at anybody maybe, or and various
people are pointed at also, right? So the
question is, could we arrange a pattern of
pointing so that everyone
was more pointed at
than they are pointing at
others? So in other words, maybe
there's seven people pointing at me, but
I'm only pointing at five people and
maybe there's, you know,
20 people pointing at you,
but you're only pointing at 15 people or
something like that, right? So I want to
know. There's a similar
question on Twitter.
For a group of people on
Twitter, could you arrange
that everyone has more followers than
following? Yeah, it's the same question.
Mathematically, it's identical.
Although, I don't know, it's not identical,
because I said you could point at yourself,
and I think that's not...
Can you follow yourself?
- No, I don't think so, no.
- I don't think you can.
Okay. So can you arrange it
so that everyone is more pointed
at than pointing? And in my book,
I give a couple of different proofs of
this. I think I give an induction proof
and then there's another proof. I think
there's three different proofs in there.
But why don't we just talk
about my favorite proof?
Suppose it were possible to arrange that
we're all more pointed at than pointing,
okay? Now what we're going
to do, we're going to agree,
we're going to give a dollar to
everyone that we're pointing at.
Okay? And so what happens?
Everybody made money,
because I was pointed at by more
people than I'm pointing, so I got
$10, but I only paid out
$7. And similarly, you
got paid $20, but you
only paid out $15. So,
if everyone is more pointed at than
pointing, then everyone makes money.
But it's obviously impossible for us to
make money as a group by just trading
money with ourselves.
And therefore, it can't be possible that
we're all more pointed at than pointing.
And this proof illustrates something.
It's one of my habits that I
suggest in the book: to anthropomorphize
your mathematical ideas.
You should imagine that
the mathematical objects
that are playing a role
in your question are
people, or active, somehow, animals, or
something that maybe have a
will and a goal and so on.
This is this process
of anthropomorphizing.
And it often makes the problems
easier to understand because we all
are familiar with the fact that
it's difficult to make money,
and the proof is totally convincing
because of our knowledge that
we can't make money as a group by trading
dollars between us, you know, without
any new money coming into the group.
But that by itself is actually a difficult
mathematical claim. I
mean, if someone had to
prove that you can't make
money by trading within a
group, you know, it can't be
that everyone in the group
makes money just by shifting money around
in the group. Maybe you think that's
obvious, and it is obvious if you think
about money. But if you had asked the
question, you know, about mathematical
functions of a certain kind and so on,
then maybe it wouldn't be as clear as
it is when you're talking about this
money thing, because of
we can build on our human experience
about the difficulty of getting
money and, you know, or other resources. It
doesn't have to be money, it could be candy,
whatever. You know, we just
know that you can't easily get
more things in that kind just
by trading within a group.
- And we should say that sometimes
the power of proof is such that the
non-obvious can be shown, and then
over time that becomes obvious.
So in the context of money,
or social systems, there's a bunch
of things that are non-obvious.
And the whole point is
that proof can guide us
to the truth, to the accurate description
of reality. We just proved
a property of money.
- It's interesting to think about, well,
what if there were infinitely many
people in your, in your group?
Then it's not true anymore.
The theorem fails. In fact, you can
arrange that everyone is strictly more
pointed than pointing. And also, you can
if everyone has even just one dollar bill—
...then you can arrange that afterwards
everyone has infinitely many dollar
bills. Cause in terms of cardinality, that's
the same. It's just, say, countable infinity in
each case. If you had countably many friends and
everyone has one dollar bill, then you can arrange
a pattern of passing those dollar bills
amongst each other so that afterwards
everyone has infinitely many dollar
bills. What you need is for each person
to be attached to, you know,
one of the train cars or
something. So, think of everyone
as coming from Hilbert's train,
but also think of them as fitting
into Hilbert's Hotel. So just have
everyone on the Nth car give all their
money to the person who ends up
in the Nth room. So they each
give one dollar to that person. So afterwards,
that person has infinitely many dollars, but
everyone only paid out one dollar.
So it's a way of making it happen.
- To what degree, sticking
on the topic of infinity,
should we think of infinity
as something real?
- That's an excellent question. I mean,
a huge part of the philosophy of
mathematics is about this kind of
question: what is the nature of
the existence of mathematical
objects, including infinity?
But I think asking about
infinity specifically is
not that different than asking
about the number five. What is—
...what does it mean for the number
five to exist? What are the numbers
really, right? This is maybe one of the
fundamental questions of mathematical
ontology. I mean, there's many different positions
to take on the question of the nature of
the existence of mathematical
objects or abstract objects in
general. And there's a certain kind of
conversation that sometimes happens
when you do that, and it goes something
like this. Sometimes people find it
problematic to talk about the
existence of abstract objects
such as numbers, and there seems
to be a kind of wish that we
could give an account of the
existence of numbers or other
mathematical objects or
abstract objects that was more
like, you know, the existence of
tables and chairs and rocks and so on.
And so there seems to be this desire
to reduce mathematical existence to
something, you know, that we can
experience physically in the real
world. But my attitude about this attempt
is that it's very
backward, I think, because
I don't think we have such a clear
understanding of the nature of
physical objects, actually. I
mean, we all have experience
about existing in the physical
world, as we must, because we do
exist in the physical world,
but I don't know of any
satisfactory account of
what it means to exist
physically. I mean, if I ask you,
say, "Imagine a certain kind of
steam locomotive," you know, and
I describe the engineering of
it and the weight of it and the
nature of the gear linkages and
you know, and I show you schematic
drawings of the whole design and so
on and, you know, we talk in
detail about every single detailed
aspect of this steam
locomotive. But then suppose
after all that conversation, I
say, "Okay, now I would like
you to tell me what would it mean for
it to exist physically, I mean, as
opposed to just being an
imaginary steam locomotive?" Then
what, what could you
possibly say about it? I
mean, except by saying, "Oh, I just mean that it exists
in the physical world." But what does that mean?
That's the question, right? It's not an
answer to the question. That is the question.
So I don't think that there's
anything sensible that
we can say about the nature of
physical existence. It is a profound
mystery. In fact, it becomes
more and more mysterious
the more physics we know.
I mean, back in, say,
Newtonian physics, one had a picture
of the nature of physical objects
as, you know, little billiard balls or something,
or maybe they're infinitely divisible or something
like that. Okay, but then this
picture is upset with the
atomic theory of matter. But
then that picture's upset
when we realize that the atoms actually
can be split and consist of electrons and
protons and neutrons and so on.
But then that picture's upset
when we realize that those things themselves are
built out of quarks and leptons and so on, and
who knows what's coming. Furthermore,
all of those things, the nature of their
existence is actually as wave functions in
you know, some cloud of probability
and so on. So it just becomes
more and more and more mysterious
the more we learn, and not at all
clarifying. So the nature
of what it means to
say that, you know, there's an apple on my
desk, and to give an account of
what that physical existence
really is at bottom, I think,
is totally absent. Whereas we
do seem to have a much more
satisfactory account of the nature
of abstract existence. I mean, I
can talk about the nature of the
empty set. You know, this is the
predicate which is never true or
something like that. I can talk
about those kind of
logical properties or the
singleton of the empty set and so on. I mean,
of course, it's very difficult if you go very
far with it, but the point is that it doesn't
get more and more mysterious. The more that you
say, it becomes only more and more
clear. So it seems to me that,
we don't really have any
understanding of what the
physical world is as opposed to
the abstract world, and it's the
abstract world where
existence is much more clear.
- It is very true
that we don't know anything about the soda bottle
or the steam locomotive just because we can
poke at it. Again, we anthropomorphize,
and that actually gets us into
trouble sometimes because I'm not
feeling the quantum mechanics when
I'm touching it.
- That's right.
- And therefore, it's easy to forget
and feel like this is real and
mathematical objects are not, but
you're making the opposite argument.
When you draw a distinction between
numerals and numbers, which numerals are
the representation of the
number on the page, and so on,
but could you say that a number
is real? Do numbers exist?
- I happen to think so. I mean,
I'm on the side of realism in
mathematics, and I think that these
abstract objects do have a real
existence in a way that we can give an account
of, in a way I just tried to describe.
- So, you would describe it as the size
of a set with four elements in it?
- Well, there are different ways to understand the
nature of four. I mean, actually, this gets into
the question of structuralism, which is
maybe a good place to talk about it.
- What is structuralism?
- Structuralism is a philosophical
position in mathematics,
or the philosophy of mathematics,
by which one emphasizes that what's
important about mathematical objects
is not what they're made out of or
what their substance or essence is,
but rather how they function in a
mathematical structure.
And so, what I call the
structuralist attitude in
mathematics is that we should
only care about our
mathematical structures up
to isomorphism. If I have a mathematical
structure of a certain kind,
and I make an exact copy of it
using different individuals
to form the elements of that structure,
then the isomorphic copy is just as
good mathematically, and there's no
important mathematical
difference that would ever arise
from working with this isomorphic
copy instead of the original
structure. And so, therefore,
that's another way of saying
that the substance of individuals,
you know, in a mathematical
structure is irrelevant with regard
to any mathematical property of that
structure. And so, to ask a question like,
"What is the number four really?" is an
anti-structuralist thing
because, you know, if you have
if you have a structure, say, the natural
numbers, you know, with all the numbers in it: 0,
1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, then
I could replace the number four
with something else, like, you
know, this bottle of water
could play the role of the number four
in that structure, and it would be
isomorphic. And it wouldn't matter
at all for any mathematical
purpose to use this alternative
mathematical system, you know?
That's to say that we don't
care what the number four is
really. That is irrelevant. The only
thing that matters is what are the
properties of the number four in
a given mathematical system, you
know, and recognizing that there
are other isomorphic copies of that
system, and the properties of that
other system's number four are
going to be identical to the
properties of this system's number
four with regard to any question that's
important about the number four. But those
questions won't be about
essence. So, in a sense,
structuralism is an
anti-essential in mathematics.
- So, is it fair to think of
numbers as a kind of pointer to
a deep underlying structure?
- Yeah, I think so, because I
guess part of the point of
structuralism is that it doesn't
make sense to consider mathematical
objects or individuals in isolation.
What's interesting and important about
mathematical objects is how they interact with
each other and how they behave in a
system, and so maybe one wants to
think about the structural role that
the objects play, you know, in a larger
system, a larger structure.
There's a famous question
that Frege had asked actually when
he was looking into the nature of
numbers, because in his logicist
program, right, he was trying to
reduce all of mathematics
to logic. And in that
process, he was referring
to the Cantor-Hume
principle that, you know,
whenever two sets are
equinumerous, then they have the same
number of elements, I mean, if and only
if. And he founded his
theory of number on this
principle, but he recognized
that there was something that
dissatisfied him about that
situation, which is that the
Cantor-Hume principle
does not seem to give
you criteria for which things
are numbers. It only tells
you a kind of identity criteria
for when two numbers are equal to
each other. Well, two numbers are
equal just in case the sets of
those sizes are equinumerous, so
that's the criteria for number
identity. But it is not
a criteria for what is a
number. And so this problem
has become known as the Julius
Caesar problem because Frege said we
don't seem to have any way of telling
from the Hume principle
whether Julius Caesar is a
number or not. So he's asking
about the essence of number and
whether... Of course, one has a sense that
he picked maybe what he was trying to
present as a ridiculous example,
because maybe you have the idea that
well, obviously Julius Caesar is not a
number, and there's a lot of philosophical
writing that seems to take that line
also, that obviously the answer
is that Julius Caesar is not a
number. But the structuralists
disagree with that
position. The structuralist attitude is,
"Look, you give me a number system.
If Julius Caesar isn't a number, then
I can just... let's take the number
17 out of that system and plug
in Julius Caesar for that role, and
now I've got a new number system, and
now Julius Caesar happens
to be the number 17."
And that's totally fine,
you know. So the point of
structuralism is is that the question of
whether Julius Caesar is a
number or not is irrelevant to
mathematics. It is irrelevant
because it is not about
structure, it's about this essence
of the mathematical objects.
So that's the structuralist
criticism of Frege's point.
- You've kind of made the case that you can
say more concrete things about the
existence of objects in mathematics
than you can in our physical reality,
about which to us human brains,
things are obvious or not.
So what's more real? The
reality we see with our eyes or the reality
we can express in mathematical theorems?
- I'm not quite sure. I mean, I live entirely
in the Platonic realm, and I don't
really understand the physical universe
at all. So I don't have strong views.
- Let's talk about the Platonic realm. Is it-
because you live there, is it real? Or-
- Oh yeah, totally, yeah. This is the
realist position in mathematics is that
abstract objects have a real existence.
And okay, what's meant by that
is that there's some sense of existence in
which those objects can be regarded as real.
- How should we think about that? How should we
try to visualize that? What does it mean to
live amongst abstract objects?
- Right.
- Because life is finite. We're
all afraid of death. We f-
fall in love with other physical
manifestations of objects.
And you're telling me that maybe
reality actually exists elsewhere,
and this is all just a projection-
- Well, I mean-
- ... from the abstract realm.
- Do abstract objects exist in a place and
at a time? That's very debatable, I think.
- Right. And what does place and time mean?
- Uh, all time, yeah, so...
- So what's more real, physics or
the mathematical Platonic space?
- Well, the mathematical Platonic realm
is... I'm not sure I would say
it's more real, but I'm saying we
understand the reality of it
in a much deeper and more-
...a more convincing way. I don't think
we understand the nature of physical
reality very well at all. And I think
most people aren't even
scratching the surface of the
question as I intend to be asking
it. So, you know, obviously we
understand physical reality.
I mean, I knock on the table-
...and so on, and we know all about what
it's like to, you know, have a birthday
party or to drink a martini or
whatever. And so we, we, we
have a deep understanding of
existing in the physical world.
But maybe understanding is the wrong
word. We have an experience of
living in the world-
- Yeah, experience.
- ...and riding bicycles and all those
things, but I don't think we actually
have an understanding at all.
I mean, very, very little
of the nature of physical
existence. I think it's a profound
mystery. Whereas I think that we do
have something a little better of an
understanding of the nature of mathematical
existence and abstract existence.
So that's how I would describe the point.
- Somehow it feels like we're approaching
some deep truth from different directions,
and we just haven't traveled
as far in the physics
world as we have in the
mathematical world.
- Maybe I could hope that someone
will give, you know, the
convincing account, but it seems to be
a profound mystery to me. I can't even
imagine what it would be like to give
an account of physical existence.
- Yeah, I wonder, like a thousand years
from now as physics progresses...
- Right
- ...what this same
conversation would look like.
- Right. That would be quite interesting.
- Do you think there's breakthroughs a thousand
years from now on the mathematics side?
Because we've just discussed, and we'll
return to, a lot of turmoil a century ago.
- Right.
- Do you think there's
more turmoil to be had?
- It's interesting to me because
I have my feet in two worlds
of mathematics and philosophy,
and to compare the
differences between these subjects.
And one of the, one of the
big... There's many cultural differences,
but one of the big cultural differences is
towards the idea of progress in the
subject. Because mathematics
has huge progress. We
simply understand the
mathematical ideas much, much
better, you're continually
improving our understanding and
there's growth in knowledge. We understand
the nature of infinity now better
than they did 100 years ago. I
mean, definitely better. And they
understood it better 100 years ago than they did,
you know, for the previous thousands of years
and so on. So, in almost every
part of mathematics, there's
improved understanding of
the core issues so much
so that, you know, the
questions at hand become
totally different and the
field sort of moves on to more
difficult, interesting questions.
Whereas in philosophy,
there's... That's a little
bit true that there's
progress. But meanwhile, it's
also true that there are these
eternal questions that have been
with us for thousands of years
and in fact, so much so that you
can find a lot of philosophers
arguing the important
contribution of philosophy is in
asking the questions rather than
answering them because it's hopeless
to answer them. I mean, the nature
of these deep philosophical
questions is so difficult.
Less of a sense of
progress is what I'm trying to
say. I don't see any reason to
think that the progress in mathematics,
in the growth in our mathematical
understanding and knowledge
won't simply continue. And
so, a thousand years from now, maybe the
mathematics that they will be doing at that time
would probably be completely
unrecognizable to me. I maybe
wouldn't even begin to understand what
they're talking about, even without sort of
witnessing, you know, the intervening
developments. So if you
bring someone from ancient
times to today, they maybe wouldn't even
understand what we're talking about
with some of the questions.
But I feel that,
you know, if Archimedes
came and we were able to
communicate, I think I would
be able to tell him, you
know, about some of the
things that are going on in
mathematics now and,
and maybe, you know...
Or, or anyone from that time, I
mean. So I think it is possible to
have this kind of progress even
when the subject kind of shifts
away from the earlier concerns as a
result of the progress, basically.
- To take a tangent on a
tangent since you mentioned
philosophy, maybe potentially more
about the questions and maybe
mathematics is about the
answers, I have to say you are a
legend on MathOverflow,
which is like Stack Overflow
but for math. You're ranked number
one all time on there with currently
over 246,000 reputation points. How do you
approach answering difficult questions on
there?
- Well, MathOverflow has really been
one of the great pleasures of
my, of my life. I've really
enjoyed it. I mean... And I've
learned so much from interacting on
MathOverflow. I've been on there since
2009, which was shortly after it started. I mean,
it wasn't exactly at the start, but a little
bit later. And and
I think it gives you the stats for how
many characters I typed and I don't
know how many million it is, but
uh, this enormous amount of um,
time that I've spent thinking about those
questions and it has really just been
amazing to me. Uh-
- How do you find the questions that
grab you and how do you go about-
- Right
- ... answering them?
- So, I'm interested in any
question that I find interesting.
So... And it's not all questions.
Sometimes certain kinds of
questions just don't
appeal to me that much.
- So you go outside of set theory as well?
- So, I think when I first
joined MathOverflow, I
was, I was basically one of
the only, one of the few
people in logic who was answering. I
mean, there were other people who know
some logic, particularly from
category theory and other parts of
mathematics that aren't in
the most traditional parts of
logic, but they were answering some of the
logic questions. So I really found myself
able to make a contribution
in those very early days by
engaging with the
logic-related questions. But
there weren't many logic people asking
questions either. But what I found was
that there was an enormous
amount of interest
in topics that were logic-adjacent. So a
question would arise, you know, in group
theory, but it had a logic aspect or an
analysis or whatever, and
there would be some logic
angle on it. And what I found
was that I was often able
to figure out an answer
by learning enough about
that other subject matter. This is what was so rewarding
for me, because basically I had to learn enough.
had to learn enough. My
expertise, my main expertise was
logic, but someone would ask a
question, you know, that, that
was about, say, the axiom of
choice in this other subject
matter or the continuum hypothesis or
something like that in an, in the other
subject matter. And I would have to learn
enough about that other subject and
the context of the question in order
to answer and I was often able to do
that. And so I was quite happy
to do that. And, and also
I learned a lot by doing that because
I had to learn about these other
problem areas. And so it really
allowed me to grow enormously
as a mathematician.
- To give some examples of questions you've
answered, what are some reasonable
sounding statements that are
independent of ZFC? What are the most
misleading alternate definitions
in taught mathematics? Is
the analysis as taught in universities
in fact the analysis of definable
numbers? Solutions to the
continuum hypothesis?
Most unintuitive application of
the axiom of choice? Non-trivial
theorems with trivial proofs?
Reductio ad absurdum or the
contrapositive? What is a chess piece
mathematically? We should say you worked
quite a bit on infinite chess, which we
should definitely talk about. It's awesome.
You've worked on so many fascinating
things. Has philosophy ever
clarified mathematics?...
why do we have two theorems
when one implies the other?
And, of course, just as an
example you've given a really, a
great, almost historical
answer on the topic of the
continuum hypothesis. Maybe that's a good
place to go. We've touched on it a little
bit, but it would be nice to
lay out what is the continuum
hypothesis that Cantor struggled with.
And I would love to also speak to the
psychology of his- his own life
story, his own struggle with it.
It's the human side of
mathematics is also fascinating.
So what is the continuum hypothesis?
- So the continuum hypothesis
is the question that arises
so naturally whenever you prove
that there's more than one size of
infinity. So Cantor proved that the infinity
of the real numbers is strictly larger
than the infinity of the natural numbers.
But immediately when you prove that,
one wants to know, well, is there anything
in between? I mean, what could be a
more natural question to ask
immediately after that? And so
Cantor did ask it, and he spent his
whole life thinking about this question.
And so the continuum hypothesis
is the assertion that there is no
infinity in between the natural numbers
and the real numbers. And, of
course, Cantor knew many sets
of real numbers. Everything in between...
I mean, everything that's in that
interval would be equinumerous
with some set of real
numbers. But we know lots of sets of real
numbers. I mean, there's all these various
closed sets, Cantor sets, and so on.
There's Vitali sets. We have all kinds of
sets of real numbers. And so you
might think, well, if the continuum
hypothesis is false, then we've probably
seen the- the set already. We just have
to prove, you know, that it's
strictly in between. But it turned
out that for all the sets that
anyone ever could define or pick
out or observe, for all the sets of
real numbers, it was always the case
either that they were countable,
in which case they're equinumerous
with the natural numbers or
else finite. Or they were
fully equinumerous with the
whole real line. And so
they were never strictly in between. I
mean, you're in this situation and you
have 100, thousands of sets that are
candidates to be in between,
but in every single case,
you can prove it's on
one side or the other
and not strictly in between.
And so in every situation
where you're able to figure out
whether it's in between or not, it's
always never strictly in between.
- Now, Cantor was obsessed with this.
- I think he was. Yeah, I'm not a historian,
so I don't know the exact history.
- Well, everything I've seen, it seems to
be the question that broke him, huh? Um,
I mean, just struggling with
different opinions on the hypothesis
within himself and... ...Desperately
chasing, trying to prove it.
- So he had a program for
proving it, which has been
affirmed in a certain respect. Of
course, the continuum hypothesis holds
for open sets. That's easy
to see. If you have an open
interval, then this is fully
equinumerous with the whole
real line. Any interval is
equinumerous with the whole line
because all you would need is a function,
you know, like the arctangent function
or something that maps the whole
real line into an interval. And
that's a one-to-one function.
So we know the open sets
have the property that their
non-trivial open sets are all
fully equinumerous with the whole real
line. So, never strictly in between.
But remarkably, Cantor proved
it also for the closed sets,
and that is using what's called
the Cantor-Bendixson theorem. So,
it's quite a remarkable result.
It's definitely not obvious.
And in this theorem actually was
the origin of the ordinals. Cantor
had to invent the ordinals in order to make
sense of his Cantor-Bendixson process.
- Can you define the open and the
closed set in this context?
- Oh, yeah. Sure. So a set
of reals is open if every
point that it contains is
surrounded by a little interval of
points, the whole tiny
little interval. But that
tiny little interval is already just by
itself equinumerous with the whole line.
So that's why that question is sort
of easy for open sets. A closed
set is a complement of an open
set, and there's a lot of
closed sets that are really
complicated of varying
sizes. So of course, any closed interval
is a closed set, but it's not only those.
There's also things like the Cantor
set, which you get by omitting middle
thirds. Maybe some people have
seen this construction. Or you can
imagine sort of randomly
taking a lot of little tiny
open intervals, you know, all over the line
and so on. So that altogether would be an open
set, and the complement of it would be
a closed set. So you can imagine just
kind of tossing down these open
intervals, and what's left over
is the closed set. Those sets can be
quite complicated, and they can have
isolated points, for example, if
the two open intervals were just
kissing and leaving only the one point
between them. But also you could
have sequences that are
converging to a point, that would
also be a closed set, or
convergent sequences of convergent
sequences and so on. That
would be a closed set also.
- The Cantor set is constructed by iteratively
removing open intervals, middle thirds,
like you mentioned, from the interval,
and trying to see, can we do a
thing that that goes in between?
- Right. So the question would
be, can you produce a set
that has an intermediate size? an
intermediate cardinality, right?
And Cantor proved, with the closed set,
"No, it's impossible." Every closed
set is either countable or
equinumerous with the whole real line.
And the Cantor program for solving
the Continuum Hypothesis was,
a sort of working up. So you did it
for open sets and for closed sets,
and you sort of work up. Maybe he wants to
go into what are called the Borel sets,
which are sort of combinations of open
and closed sets. And there's a vast
hierarchy of Borel complexity. And it
turns out that the Continuum
Hypothesis has been proved also
for the Borel sets in this hierarchy.
But then one wants to go beyond.
What about more complicated sets? So
there's this hierarchy of complexity
for sets of real numbers. And Cantor's
idea was to sort of work your way up the
hierarchy by proving that
the Continuum Hypothesis
was more and more true for those more
and more complicated sets, based on our
understanding of the
earlier cases. And that has
been carried out to a remarkable degree.
It turns out that one begins to need
large cardinal assumptions,
though, in order to get to
the higher realms, even at the
level of projective hierarchy,
which are sets that you can define by
using quantifiers over the real numbers
themselves. So you get this hierarchy
on top of the Borel hierarchy,
the hierarchy of projectively
definable sets. And it
turns out that if you have enough large
cardinals, then the projective sets
also are always either countable or
equinumerous with the whole real
line. And then one can try
to go beyond this and so
on. So I view all of those results
which came, you know, in the past 50
years, the later ones, as fulfilling
this Cantor idea that goes back,
you know, 120 years to his idea
that we would prove the Continuum
Hypothesis by establishing more
and more instances for greater and
greater complexity of sets. But of course,
even with what we know now, it
hasn't fully succeeded and it
can't because the hierarchy
of complexity doesn't include
all sets of real numbers. Some of them
are, sort of, transcending this hierarchy
completely, in a way. And
so the program can't ever fully be
successful, especially in light
of the independence result.
- Yeah. Well, spoiler alert, can you
go to the independence result?
- Sure.
- So what does that mean? So the Continuum
Hypothesis was shown to be independent
from the ZFC axioms of mathematics?
- Right. So the ZFC axioms
were the axioms that were
put forth first by Zermelo
in 1908 in regard to his
proof of the well-order theorem
using the axiom of choice. That
wasn't fully ZFC. At that time, it
was just Zermelo theory because he
sort of... There was a kind of missing
axiom, the replacement axiom, and the
foundation axiom were added later, and
that's what makes the Zermelo-Fraenkel
axiomatization, which
became, sort of, standard.
Actually, there's another aspect, which
is Zermelo's original theory allowed
for the existence of ur-elements, or these
atoms, mathematical
objects that are not sets
but out of which we build
the set theoretic universe,
whereas set theorists today generally
don't use ur-elements at all. I,
I argue that it's really the
philosophy of structuralism that
leads them to omit the ur-elements
because it turns out that
if you adopt ZFC axioms with ur-elements,
ZFCU it's called, or ZFA, then any
structure that exists, any mathematical structure
that exists in that set theoretic universe
with the atoms is isomorphic to a structure
that doesn't use the atoms at all.
And you don't need the atoms if you're a
structuralist because you only care about
the structures up to isomorphism
anyways, and the theory is simply more
elegant and clear without
the atoms. They're just not
needed. And so that's why today when
we talk about set theory, generally we
talk about the atom-free
version, and ZFC has no
ur-elements. Okay. So we formulate the ZFC
axioms of set theory. These
are expressing the main
principle ideas that we have about the
nature of sets and set existence. And
Canter had asked about
the continuum hypothesis
in the late 19th century, and it
remained open, totally open until 1938.
- We should mention, I apologize,
that it was the number one
problem in the Hilbert's 23 set
of problems formulated at the
beginning of the century.
- That's right.
- Maybe you can comment on why
did he put that as number one.
- So... Right. So Hilbert had introduced
at his famous address at the
turn of the century this list
of problems that he thought
could guide or were
important to consider in the
coming century of mathematics. I mean, that's how
people talk about it now, although I'm not sure at
all... Of course, I can't really
speak for Hilbert at all, but if
you were a very prominent mathematician,
I find it a little hard to believe that
Hilbert would have conceived of his list
in the same way that we now
take his lists. I mean,
having observed the century
unfold, we know that that list of
23 problems did in fact guide
whole research programs, and
it was extremely important and
influential. But at the time, Hilbert
would have no reason to think that
that would be true, and he was
just giving a lecture and
had a list of problems that
he thought were very important.
And so I tend to I would find
it more reasonable to think that he was just
making a list of problems that he thought were
extremely interesting and important
and fundamental in a way without
the kind of heavy burden of
guiding this 20th century
research. Although it turns out
that in fact that's exactly what they did.
And we already discussed how
Hilbert's views on the nature of set
theory and the fundamental
character, that quote
where he said, "No one will
cast us from the paradise that
Canter has created for us." So, so I think
Hilbert was convinced by Canter
on the importance and the
fundamental nature of the continuum hypothesis
for the foundations of mathematics,
which was a critically important
development for the unity of
mathematics. I mean, before set theory
emerged as a foundation of mathematics,
you know, there are different
subjects in mathematics.
There's algebra and there's analysis,
real analysis, and topology and
geometry, and so on. There are
all these disparate subjects
with their own axioms,
separate axioms, right?
And sometimes it happens, like when
you're proving, say, the fundamental
theorem of algebra, you know, that the
complex numbers are an algebraically closed
field that you can solve
any polynomial equation in.
But the proof methods for
that theorem come from
other parts of mathematics. You know,
those topological proofs and so
on. And so how does that
work? I mean, if you have totally different
axiom systems, but you're using results from
one subject in another subject,
it's somehow incoherent
unless there's one underlying
subject. So the unity of
mathematics was provided by the
existence of a mathematical foundation like set
theory. And at the time, it was set theory.
And so it's critically
important to be able to have a
single theory in which one views
all of mathematics as taking
place to resolve that kind
of transfer and borrowing
phenomenon that was definitely
happening. So that must
have been part of Hilbert's thinking about
why it's so important to have a uniform
foundation, and set theory was playing that
role at the time. Now, of course, we have
other possible foundations coming
from category theory or type
theory, and there's univalent
foundations now. So there are sort of
competing foundations now. There's no
need to just use one foundation, one
set theoretic foundation. Although
set theory continues to, in my
view, have an extremely successful
meta-mathematical analysis as a
foundation, I think is much more
successful than set theory for any
of those other foundations, but
it's much less amenable though to things like
computer proof and so on, which is part of
the motivation to find these alternative
foundations. So, yeah, okay, so
just to talk about Hilbert
though, I think he was motivated
by the need for a unifying foundation of
mathematics, and set theory was playing
that role, and the continuum hypothesis
is such a core, fundamental
question to ask, so it
seems quite natural that he would
put it on the list. There were other
logic-related questions though, like Hilbert's
tenth problem is also related to logic.
This is the question about
Diophantine equations, and
he asked to provide an algorithm
to decide whether a given
Diophantine equation has a solution
in the integers. So a Diophantine
equation is just, I mean, it's
maybe a fancy way of talking about
something that's easy to understand,
a polynomial equation, except it's
not just one variable, many variables.
So you have polynomials in
several variables over the
integers, and you want to know, can
you solve it? So the problem is,
as stated by Hilbert, to provide an
algorithm for answering the
question whether a given
polynomial equation has a
solution in the integers.
So he's sort of presuming that there is an
algorithm, but he wants to know what it
is. What is the algorithm? But the problem
was solved by proving that there is no
algorithm. It's an undecidable
problem, like the halting problem.
There is no computable procedure that
will correctly decide whether a given
polynomial equation has a solution
in the integers. So that's quite
a remarkable development, I think.
There were also a few other
logic-related questions on the list.
- And so eventually, continuum hypothesis
was shown to be independent from ZFC
axioms, as we've mentioned. So,
how does that make you feel?
What is independence,
and what does that mean?
- But once you tell the story,
the historical story...
- Yes
- ...is really quite dramatic.
- Yeah, that's great
- I think, because Cantor poses the
question, you know, late 19th century.
And then it's totally open. Hilbert asks
about it, you know, at the turn of the
20th century. Nobody has
any clue. There's no answer
coming until 1938. This is four
decades later, right? So a long
time, and Gödel, Kurt Gödel, proved
half of it. What he proved is that
if the axioms of set theory are consistent,
then there is a set theoretic world
where both the axiom of choice and
the continuum hypothesis are true.
So what he's doing is showing this is called
the constructible universe, Gödel's L.
So he solved this. This is the same result
where he answers the safety question
of the axiom of choice, but
also for the continuum hypothesis. They're
true in the same set theoretic universe
we get. So if ZF, without the axiom
of choice, is consistent, then so is
ZFC plus the continuum hypothesis is the
result. 1938. It's really such a beautiful
argument. It's just
incredible, I think, because
he's building an alternative mathematical
reality. That's the structure
of the proof, is that, okay,
if there's any mathematical reality,
if there's any set theoretic
world, then we're going to build
another one, a separate one, a
different one, maybe different. Maybe it's
the same as the original one, it could be.
If we started already in the one that he
built, then it would be the same. But
there's no reason to assume it was
the same. So he has this kind of
model construction method to build this
alternative set theoretic reality,
the constructible universe. And then
he proves that the axiom of choice is true
there, and also the continuum hypothesis is
true there, and it's just amazing.
Really beautiful argument.
Okay, so then for the other part of the
independence, that's only half of it,
because Gödel shows basically
that you can't refute the continuum
hypothesis, but that's not
the same thing as proving
that it's true. He showed
that if set theory is consistent...
without the continuum hypothesis, then it's
consistent with the continuum hypothesis.
So that's not the same thing as
proving that it's true. Yeah.
And then it didn't come until 1963, when
Paul Cohen invented the method of forcing.
And proved that if there's a model of set
theory, then there's a model of
set theory in which the continuum
hypothesis is false. So Cohen also is
giving us this extremely
powerful tool for building
alternative mathematical
realities, is how I think about
it. He's explained to us how
to take any set theoretic
world and build another different one
in which the continuum hypothesis is
false. The forcing extension.
- It's just such a fascinating technique,
tool of forcing. Maybe I'm
anthropomorphizing it,
but it seems like a way to escape one
mathematical universe into another, or to
expand it or to alter it. So
you travel between mathematical
universes. Can you explain
the technique of forcing?
- Yeah, exactly. It's all those things. It's
so wonderful. I mean, that's exactly how
I think about it. I mean...
- And we should mention, maybe this is
a good place to even give a bigger
picture. One of your more
controversial ideas in mathematics as
laid out in the paper, The
Set-Theoretic Multiverse, you
describe that there may not be one true
mathematics, but rather multiple
mathematical universes, and
forcing is one of the techniques that
gets you from one to the other, so...
- The-
- Can you explain the whole
shebang? The whole...
- Yeah, sure. Let's get into it. So the
lesson of Cohen's result and Gödel's
result and so on, these producing
these alternative set theoretic
universes. We've observed that
the continuum hypothesis is
independent and the axiom of choice
is independent of the other axioms,
but it's not just those two. We have
thousands of independence results.
Practically every non-trivial
statement of infinite
combinatorics is independent
of ZFC. I mean, this is the
fact. It's not universally true. There are
some extremely difficult
prominent results where
people proved things in
ZFC, but for the most
part, if you ask a non-trivial
question about infinite
cardinalities, then it's very
likely to be independent of
ZFC. And we have these
thousands of arguments, these
forcing arguments that are
used to establish that. And
so how should we take that? I
mean, on the one hand, if you have
a theory and it doesn't answer
any of the questions that you're
interested in... Okay, so what does
that mean? If you're following what I
call the universe view or the monist view,
you might naturally say, "Well, look, ZFC
is a weak theory, and there's the true
set theoretic reality out there,
and we need a better theory
'cause the current theory isn't
answering the questions. Everything's
independent." And so that seems
like a quite reasonable thing
to take. If you think that there is...
that every set theoretic question has a
definite answer and there's a unique
set theoretic truth or a unique
fact of the matter, right,
this is the universe view.
- And by the way, to reiterate,
independent means it cannot be
proved or disproved within this
axiomatic system within this theory.
- Right. Exactly. So to be independent means you
can't prove it and also you can't prove that
it's false. You can't refute it.
- And you're saying that's why the
statement is so traumatic or sad, that
most of the interesting stuff, as you
said, has been shown to be independent.
of ZFC.
- But, but that's an interesting way to put
it, I think, because it reminds me of this,
uh... when I was a graduate
student in Berkeley, there was
another graduate student who
was working with a non-logic
professor in C-star algebras or something
like this. So it's a part of
analysis or functional analysis,
and they were looking at a
question, and it turned out to be
independent of ZFC, right?
And the attitude of this
other professor was that, "Oh,
I guess I asked the wrong
question." But my attitude and the
attitude of all the set theorists
was when you ask a question that
turns out to be independent, then you asked
exactly the right question because this is the
one... You know, it's carving
nature at its joints.
You're adjudicating the nature
of set theoretic reality
by finding these two realms.
You find one of these
dichotomies. You know, there's the worlds where
it's true and the worlds where it's false.
And so when you ask that question, that's to
be celebrated. It means you asked exactly
the right, interesting, fascinating
question. So it's not a kind of bleak
thing that you can't prove it and you can't
refute it, and that's such a disaster.
Rather, it means that you found this...
this... this cleavage in reality, in
mathematical reality, and it's good to know
about those when they happen, you know?
- Carving nature at its joints.
So what can you do about the
things that are shown to
be independent from ZFC?
- Right. So...
- What are the techniques?
- So one thing is that because
of the incompleteness theorem,
we know that there's
going to be... For any
theory that we can write down, there's
going to be things that we can't
prove, true things we can't prove in it.
So there's those things are gonna be
independent. And so we're already aware of
the fact that there will always be these
independent phenomenon for
any theory that we write. And
furthermore, some of those theories
we won't even be able to prove
that they're consistent, you know, like the
consistency of their own theory. So that's called the
consistency-strength hierarchy.
So it's a direct consequence of Gödel's
second incompleteness theorem that
for any theory we can write down,
then towering over it is this
incredibly tall tower of
consistency strength,
where the strength in theories
aren't just adding another
axiom, but they're adding another
axiom even whose consistency was not
provable in the previous
layers of the hierarchy.
So, and so how lucky we
are to find the large
cardinal axioms that instantiate
exactly this feature of increasing
consistency strength, this unending and
extremely tall hierarchy of consistency
strength of axioms. And it
exactly fulfills the prediction
that Gödel's theorem
makes about that kind of
thing. Except, it's the
axioms in the large cardinal
hierarchy aren't, you know, metalogical
self-referential statements of the
form that sometimes arise in the Gödel
analysis, but rather they're professing
existence of big infinities, these
large cardinal axioms. And so
it's such a welcome
development, and yet it's
also known that the
continuum hypothesis is
independent of all of the known
large cardinal axioms. So
none of the large cardinal
axioms we can prove, none
of them can settle the continuum
hypothesis. So the independence
phenomenon is still there for
things like the continuum
hypothesis and the cardinal
combinatorics that I mentioned.
- So you're building this
incredible hierarchy
of axiomatic systems that are
more powerful than the ZFC.
- More powerful than ZFC and then more powerful
than that, more powerful than that, and so on.
It keeps going forever, and
it will never be finished.
- And still, to this day, the
continuum hypothesis does not...
- It's not settled by any of
the large cardinal axioms.
- Wow. Wow.
What does that mean? How does that make
you feel? Will it ever be settled?
- Yeah, well, it's part of my
multiverse view, I guess. So which
we started by, I was describing
the universe view, which
is the view that, look, there are
facts of the matter about all
of these questions and that it will
turn out, if you're a universe view
person, which I'm not, but if
you are, then you will hold
that there is a right answer to the
continuum hypothesis question, and there's a
right answer to the
large cardinal questions
and so on. And that what we should
be aiming to do is figure out this
one true set theory, okay? In
contrast I take the developments
of set theory over the past half century or
more as evidence that there isn't such a
unique set theoretic reality. Rather,
what we've been doing for decades
now is producing more and
more alternative set theoretic
universes in which the
fundamental truths are differing
from one to the other. And that
is the answer to the continuum
hypothesis question. The fact that
given any model of set theory, there's
a forcing extension where the continuum
hypothesis is true, and another one
where it's false. You can sort of
turn it on and off like a light switch.
And that's the fundamental nature of the
continuum hypothesis is that you can have
it or you can have the negation as you like
within a very closely
related set theoretic world.
Wherever you happen to be living,
there's a closely related one where
CH is true, where the continuum
hypothesis is true, and one
where it's false. And that
itself is a kind of answer.
It's not a singularist
answer, a universe view
answer. It's a pluralist answer. And this
led me to my views on the
multiverse view of set theory and
pluralist truth, namely the fundamental
nature of set theoretic truth
has this plural character in that
there isn't a singular meaning
to the fundamental terms, but
rather, there's this choice of
alternative set-theoretic universes
that have different truths.
- So, what does the multiverse view
of mathematics enable you to
do? What does it empower you to
do and what are the limitations?
What are the things it breaks
about mathematics as a field, as a
space of knowledge, and
what does it enable?
- First of all, I guess one should say
that these different philosophical
positions that you might take in the
philosophy of set theory, like the multiverse
view or the universe view,
we don't ever disagree about
the mathematics. We're all
agreeing on what the theorems are.
It's a question of philosophical
perspective on the underlying meaning
or the context, or really what is a
philosophy of mathematics for, right?
And I mean, if you look back
in history, for example, like
to the time of calculus with
Newton and Leibniz, right?
They famously developed the ideas of calculus
using their concepts of infinitesimals,
and those foundations
were roundly mocked by
Bishop Berkeley and so on who talked
about, you know, what are these
same evanescent increments,
and shall we not call them the
ghosts of departed quantities? But the
foundations really were kind of
completely suspect, I think,
at the time. And that foundation
of infinitesimal calculus really
only became rigorous in the
1950s or so with the development
of non-standard analysis and
Robinson's work. Okay, so the point
I'm trying to make is that, do you
need a robust, rigorous foundation of
mathematics to make enduring insights in
mathematics? And the answer,
regrettably, is apparently not because
in calculus, even with that lousy, creaky
foundation of infinitesimals not even
well understood that Newton and
Leibniz had, they proved all the
fundamental theorems of calculus and,
you know, they had all the main insights
in those early days
with that extremely bad
foundation. And so that shows you something
about the relevance of the kind of
foundational views on mathematics
and how important they are for
mathematical developments and progress
and insight. I mean, because I
view those early mathematical
developments in calculus as
genuinely mathematical
and extremely important
and insightful, even though the
foundations weren't any good,
from, you know, by contemporary
perspectives. Okay.
So, rather... So when it comes to
the philosophy of set theory and
the dispute between the universe view and
the pluralism, my view is that the choice
of the philosophical perspective
doesn't actually have to do with the
mathematical developments
directly at all. Rather, it
tells us, "Where should
set theory go? What
kind of set theory should we
be looking at? What kind of
questions should we be
asking?" So if you have a
universe mentality, the
universe view, then you're
gonna be pushed to try to
find and articulate the
nature of the one true
set-theoretic universe.
And I think that remark is really well
borne out by the developments with
Hugh Woodin, who's one of the
most prominent mathematicians
and philosophers with the universe
view and his theory of ultimate
L and so on. And he's really striving.
- Who was also your advisor.
- He was also my supervisor.
My graduate supervisor.
- Which is a, a personal story as well.
- This, this fundamental dispute,
yeah, on this question.
he is uh, has a very strong and successful
research program, sort
of trying to give legs
to finding the nature of
the one true set theoretic
universe. And it's driving the
questions that he's asking and the
mathematical programs that he's
pursuing. Whereas if you have a
pluralist view, as I do,
then you're gonna be led and
attracted to questions that have
to do with the interaction of
different set theoretic
universes. Or maybe you wanna
understand the nature of how are the
models of set theory related to their
forcing extensions and so on.
And so this led to things,
um that I call, say, set theoretic potentialism,
where you think about a set theoretic
universe in a potentialist way. Not in
the sense of potential infinity directly,
because all of these universes have
infinite sets inside them already.
But they're potentialist in the sense
that we could have more sets.
The universe could be wider
and taller and so on, you
know, by forcing or by
extending upward. And so we
wanna understand the nature of
this realm of set theoretic universes.
And, and that's quite some
exciting work. And so with
Benedikt Loewe and I, we proved
some theorems on the modal logic of
forcing and set theoretic potentialism
under end extension. I've done a bunch
of work on this topic. And, and also I
I mounted together with Gunter Fuchs and Jonas Riets, who
was one of my own PhD students, the topic of set theoretic
my own PhD students, the
topic of set theoretic
geology, which is studying...
It's taking the metaphor of
forcing. I mean, in forcing, you have
the ground model and the forcing
extension. And when I was
first working with Jonas
he said, "I wanna undo forcing. I wanna go
backwards." And I at first said,
"But Jonas, it doesn't work
that way. You start in the model, in the ground
model, and you go out, you go to the bigger one.
bigger one. You know, that's how forcing
works." And he said, "No, no, I wanna go
backwards." And, and so he was
quite persistent, actually.
And um, and so finally, I said,
"Okay, let's, let's do it. Let's
take it seriously." And so we
sat down and, and s- and started
thinking, you know, more precisely and
carefully and deeply about the nature
of taking a set theoretic universe
and seeing where did it come
from by forcing, which was a new way
of thinking about forcing at the time.
- Like reverse engineering the forcing?
- Yeah, something like that. Forcing
is a way of producing a new
universe. And so you could start somewhere and
go to that new universe, or you could look
where you are and say, "Well, look, I got
here by doing that already in the past."
So we defined models of the bedrock model
and ground, you know, sort of
undoing the forcing. And, and
really, it was quite fruitful. And I view
this as part of the sort of pluralist
perspective, except the difference
is that set theoretic geology is
amenable to the universe
view. So even though the work
was inspired by this philosophical view
on the multiverse view, nevertheless, the
central ideas of geology
have now been picked up
by the people with the research program
in the universe view. Because it turns
out that set theoretic geology
is helping them or us to
discover the nature of the one
true universe relates to its
mantle. There's this concept of the set
theoretic mantle that I had introduced in
a way that is extremely
interesting. And so it's
historically quite funny, I think,
because this research program
that grew entirely out of
the pluralist point of
view ended up being picked up by the
universe point of view research program
in a, in a way that is quite important.
- Can you prove something in the world
that you arrived at through forcing and
then take some of that
back to the ground model?
- Yeah, absolutely. And that's a really powerful
argument method, actually. People often
want to do that. Suppose
you're in some set theoretic
context. You know, you could think
about as living in a set theoretic
universe, and you want to prove
something in that universe only.
But maybe one way to do it is to first
construct this forcing extension
and then use the features
about this forcing extension to realize
that certain things must have already been
true in the ground model. And then you throw
the forcing extensions away and you...
- Oh, cool
- ...yeah. So this can happen.
To pick a more elementary
example, if you think about
the early days of people
reasoning with the complex numbers
before they really understood them.
So they would have these algebraic
equations that they're trying to
solve, you know, and they would
have the tools and methods of
doing it, but then in the course of, you know, so
they would have to do things to the polynomial
and change the factors and so on, and
produce other polynomials and solve them and
so on. And sometimes, they
could produce solutions.
in the middle of their construction,
they were led to, like, the
square root of minus five or
something, you know, in the
construction. And they didn't have
any meaning for that, but they
would just do it symbolically,
you know. And, and
eventually, it would turn in, you know,
because of the methods that they had, they
would combine and they would cancel and so on, and
all the complex parts would cancel out and they'd end
up with this, you know, actual answer,
you know, three plus square root of
17 or whatever. And, and they could
check it and it worked. It was
a solution of the original
equation. And so it must have been
bewildering to them because they
would start with this question purely
in the real numbers, an algebraic
question, and they would
march on their method and proceed
through the land of nonsense, you
know, with these square roots of
negative numbers and then end up with
an answer that was real again that
they could verify was correct.
And so, I view this kind of forcing
argument that I was just describing
in a similar way. You start
in set theory, and you go to
this land of nonsense in the forcing
extension, this imaginary world.
And you argue and you come back. I mean,
you make a consequence in the ground model,
and it's such a beautiful way of arguing.
- So, speaking of the land of nonsense, I
have to ask you about surreal numbers, but
first, I need another bathroom break.
All right, we're back, and
there's this aforementioned
wonderful blog post on
the surreal numbers, and
that there's quite a simple
surreal number generation
process that can basically
construct all numbers.
So, maybe this is a good spot to ask,
what are surreal numbers and what is
the way we can generate all numbers?
- So, the surreal number
system is an amazing,
amazingly beautiful mathematical system
that was introduced by John Conway.
- Rest in peace, one of the great
mathematicians ever on this earth.
- Yes, absolutely. And I really admire his
style of mathematical thinking and
working in mathematics, and the
surreal number system is a good instance
of this. So, the way I think about the
surreal numbers system is what
it's doing is providing us
a number system that unifies all
the other number systems. So, it
extends the real numbers.
Well, not only, it extends the
integers, the natural numbers and the integers
and the rational numbers, and the real
numbers, but also the ordinals and the
infinitesimals. So, they're all sitting
there inside the surreal numbers, and
it's this colossal system
of numbers. It's not a
set even. It's a proper class, it
turns out, because it contains all
the ordinal numbers. But
it's generated from nothing
by a single rule, and
the rule is, so we're
gonna generate the numbers in
stages, in transfinite sequence of
stages. And at every stage,
we take the numbers that we
have so far and in all possible
ways, we divide them into
two sets, a lower set and an
upper set, or a left set and
a right set. So we divide them
into these two sets, so that
everything in the left set is less than
everything in the right set, and then at that
moment, we create a new
number that fits in the gap
between L and R. Okay? That's it. That's
all we do. So, let me say it again.
The rule is, we proceed
in stages, and at any
stage, then in all possible
ways, we divide the
numbers we have into two collections,
the left set and the right set, so that everything
in the left set is less than everything in the right
set. And we create a new number, a new
surreal number that will fit in that gap.
Okay. So, for example, we could start... At
the beginning, we don't have any numbers.
We haven't created anything
yet, and so, well,
we could take nothing, and we could
divide it into two sets, the empty lower
set and the empty upper set.
I mean, the two empty sets.
And everything in the empty set is less than
everything in the empty set because that's a vacuous
statement. So we satisfy the conditions,
and we apply the number generation
rule, which says we should create
a new number. And this is
what I call the Big Bang of
numbers, the surreal genesis
when the number zero is
born. Zero is the firstborn
number that is bigger than
everything in the empty set and
less than everything in the empty
set. Okay, but now we have
this number zero, and so
therefore, we now can define new gaps.
Because if we put zero into
the left set and have an
empty right set, then we should create
a new number that's bigger than
zero and less than everything in the empty
set, and that number is called the number
one. And similarly, at that same stage, we
could have put zero into the right set,
and so that would be the firstborn number
that's less than zero, which is called
minus one. So now we have
three numbers, minus one,
zero and one, and they have four gaps
because there could be a number below
minus one or between minus one
and zero or between zero and one
or above one, and so we
create those four new
numbers. The first number above one is called
two. The first number between zero and one
is called 1/2, and then on the negative
side, we have minus 1/2 and minus
two and so on. So now we have,
what is that, seven numbers?
seven numbers. So there's eight
gaps between them. So at the next
birthday, they call them, the next
stage will be born all the numbers
between those gaps, and then between
those and between those and so
on. And as the days progress,
we get more and more
numbers, but those are just the finite
birthdays, because as I said, it's a
transfinite process. So
at day omega, that's the
first infinite day, we're
going to create a lot of
new surreal numbers. So
every real number will
be born at that stage because
every real number fills a
gap in the previously born rational
numbers that we had just talked
about. It's not all the rationals, because
actually the rational numbers that are born at the
finite stages are just the rationals
whose denominator is a power of
two, it turns out. Those are
called the dyadic rationals.
So the real numbers are
all born on day omega,
but also some other numbers
are born on day omega, namely,
the ordinal omega itself is the firstborn
number that's bigger than all those
finite numbers, and minus
omega is the firstborn number
that's less than all those finite
numbers. But also, we have
the number epsilon, which is the firstborn
number that's strictly bigger than
zero and strictly less than
all the positive rational
numbers. So that's going to be
an infinitesimal number in that
gap, and so on. On day omega plus one, we
get more numbers, and then omega plus two
and so on. And the numbers just keep coming
forever. So, this is how you
build the surreal number
system. And then it turns out
you can define the arithmetic
operations of addition and
multiplication in a natural way that
is engaging with this recursive
definition. So we have sort of
recursive definitions of
plus and times for the
surreal numbers. And it
turns out you can prove
that they make the surreal numbers
into what's called an ordered
field. So they satisfy the field axioms,
which means that you have distributivity
and commutativity of
addition and multiplication.
multiplication, and also
you have reciprocals for
every non-zero number. You can
divide by the number. So you can add
and multiply and divide and subtract.
And furthermore, you can take
square roots. And furthermore, every
odd degree polynomial has a root,
which is true in the real numbers, because
if you think about, say, a cubic or a
fifth degree polynomial, then
you know it's going to cross the
axis, because it has opposite
behaviors on the two
infinities, because it's an odd degree
polynomial. So on the positive side,
it's going to the positive infinity. On the
negative side, it would be going to minus infinity.
So it has to cross. So we
know in the real numbers,
every odd degree
polynomial has a root. And
that's also true in the surreal numbers.
So that makes it what's called a
real closed field, which is a
very nice mathematical theory.
So it's really quite interesting
how we can find copies
of all these other number systems
inside the surreal numbers.
- But the surreal numbers are fundamentally
discontinuous as you're worried about.
What are the consequences of this?
- Right. So the surreal numbers
have a property that they form
a non-standard model of the
real field, which means that
they provide a notion of infinitesimality
that one can use to develop
calculus on the grounds of Robinson's
non-standard theory that I had
mentioned earlier. But they don't have
the least upper bound property
for subcollections. There's
no set of surreal numbers, no
non-trivial set of surreal numbers
has at least upper bound, and there
are no convergent sequences in
the surreal numbers. And so
for the sort of ordinary
use in calculus based on limits and
convergence, that method does
not work in the surreal numbers
at all. So that's what I mean when I say
the surreal numbers are fundamentally
discontinuous. They have a
fundamental discontinuity going
on. But you can still do calculus
with them, because you have
infinitesimals if you
use these non-standard
methods, the infinitesimal-based
methods to calculus. And
people do that. I once organized a
conference in New York, and we had John Conway
as a speaker at that conference. And there
was a question session, and
someone asked him, I mean,
it's a bit rude, I think, but they
asked it and the question
was, "What is your greatest
disappointment in life?" I mean, I would never
ask a question like that at a conference
in a very public setting. But
Conway was extremely graceful,
and he answered by saying that,
"The surreal numbers..." Not the
numbers themselves, but the reception
of the surreal numbers, because
he had ambition that the
surreal numbers would
become a fundamental number
system used throughout mathematics and
science, because it was able to do
non-set analysis, it was able to do calculus,
it unified the ordinals and so on. And it's
such a unifying, amazing
structure, beautiful structure
with elegant proofs and
sophisticated ideas all around
it. And he was disappointed that it
never really achieved that unifying
status that he had the
ambition for. And this,
he mentioned as his
greatest disappointment.
- Yeah, Donald Knuth tried to celebrate
it. It never quite took hold.
- So I don't want to give the impression though
that the surreal numbers are not widely studied,
because there are thousands
of people who are...
- Sure
- ...studying it. In fact, Philip Ehrlich,
who is one of the world experts on
the surreal numbers, mentioned to
me once that Conway was his own
worst enemy with regard to
that very issue, because
in the Conway style,
everything is a game. And he
treated the surreal numbers
as a kind of plaything, a
toy, and maybe that makes people
not take it seriously.
Although my view is that it is
extremely serious, useful, and profound,
and I've been writing a whole series
of essays on the surreal numbers for
my Substack at Infinitely More. And
I just find the whole subject so
fascinating and beautiful.
I mean, it's true. I'm not
applying it in engineering, which maybe
was part of this Conway ambition.
- And I just wanted to,
before I forget, mention
the Conway, turning everything
into a game. It is a fascinating
point that I didn't quite think about,
which I think the Game of Life is just an
example of exploration of cellular automata.
I think cellular automata is one of the
most incredible, complicated,
fascinating... It feels like an
open door into a world we have not
quite yet explored. And it's such
a beautiful illustration of that world,
the Game of Life, but calling it a
game, maybe life balances it,
'cause that's your powerful word,
but it's not quite a
game. It's a fascinating
invitation to an incredibly complicated
and fascinating mathematical
world. I think every time I see
cellular automata and the fact that
we don't quite have mathematical
tools to make sense
of that world, it fills me with awe.
Speaking of a thousand years from
now, it feels like that is a world
we might make some progress on.
- The Game of Life is a sort of
playground for computably undecidable
questions because in fact,
you can prove that the
question of whether a given
cell will ever become alive
is computably undecidable. In other words,
given a configuration and you ask,
"Will this particular cell ever
you know, be alive?" "...in the
evolution?" And you can prove that that
question is equivalent to the
Halting Problem. It's computably
undecidable. It's semi-decidable
in the sense that if it will
become alive, then you will know it at a
finite stage because you could just run the
Game of Life algorithm and let
it run. And if it ever did come
alive, you could say, "Yeah, it was alive."
But if you've run it for a thousand
years and it hasn't come alive yet,
then you don't necessarily seem to
have any basis for saying, "No, it won't
ever come alive" if the behavior was very
complicated.
Maybe if you have a complete understanding of
the evolution of the behavior, then you can say
no, but you can prove you won't
always have that understanding-
... precisely because the problem is
equivalent to the halting problem.
- And nevertheless, when you sit back
and look and visualize the thing, some
little mini cellular automata
civilizations are born and die quickly,
and some are very predictable
and boring, but some have this
rich incredible complexity. And maybe that
speaks to a thing I wanted to ask on
the halting problem and decidability.
You've mentioned this thing where if
you understand the program deeply, you
might be able to say something. So
can we say something interesting
about maybe once statistically
how many programs
we know something about in terms of whether
they halt or not? Or what does it mean to
understand a program deeply enough
to be able to make a prediction?
- The main lesson of
computability theory in my view
is that it's never the case
that you can have a thorough
understanding of the behavior
of a program by looking at the
program, and that the content
of what you learn from
a program, I mean, in the most general
case, is always obtained just by
running it and looking
at the behavior. And the
proof of that is there's a theorem
called Rice's Theorem, which
makes that idea completely robust. But I
want to just take a little detour towards
another question riffing
on something that you just
said. Namely, one can ask the question,
What is the behavior of
a random program? So you
have some formal computing language, you
know, and you want to, you know, look
at the collection of all programs of a
certain size. Maybe there's only finitely
many. And
can you say something about the behavior
of a randomly chosen one, like with a
certain likelihood it will have a certain
behavior? And the answer turns out
to be extremely interesting.
Once years ago,
Alexey Myasnikov asked me a
question. He had this concept of a
decision problem with a black
hole, and what that means is
it's a decision problem which is
possibly difficult in the worst
case, but the difficulty
was concentrated in a very
tiny region called the black hole. And
outside of that black hole, it was very easy.
And so, for example, this kind of
problem is a terrible problem to use if
you're basing your encryption
scheme, you know, you don't
want to use a black hole problem
because if someone can rob the bank
95% of the time, you know,
then that's not what you want,
or even any non-trivial percent
of the time is too dangerous.
So you don't want to use problems that
are, you know, almost every case is easily
solved as the basis of your
encryption. And the question Alexey
asked me was, "Does the
halting problem have a black
hole?" You know? And so if we
take, say, the standard model of
Turing machines, it's one-way
infinite tape with zeros
and ones on the tape and so on, the head
moving back and forth, and you know, it
stops when it gets into the
halt state, then it turns
out we proved that there is
a black hole. And what that
means is there's a computer
procedure that decides correctly
almost every instance of the halting problem.
Even though the halting problem is not
decidable, we can decide almost
every instance. So, more
precisely, there's a collection
of Turing machine programs
such that we can easily decide
whether a program's in that
collection or not. And for the
programs in the collection,
we can decide the halting
problem for those programs
easily. And furthermore,
almost every program is
in the collection in the sense that as
the number of states goes to, you know,
becomes large, the proportion of
programs in the collection goes to 100%.
So the asymptotic density
of the programs is one.
And the proof was quite fascinating
because it's one of these situations where
the theorem sounds really surprising, I
think, to many people when I first tell it,
I mean, to computability
experts. Then it's sort of
intriguing to think that you can solve
almost every instance of a halting
problem. But then when
they hear the proof, it's
completely a letdown. Unfortunately,
nobody likes the theorem after the proof.
And so the proof is so simple,
though. If you know how a Turing
machine operates, there's this infinite
paper tape on which the machine writes
zeros and ones, and the head moves
back and forth according to rigid
instructions. And the instructions are
all of the form,
if the machine is in such and such a state
and it's reading such and such symbol
on the tape, then it should write
this symbol on the tape and it should
change to this new state specified, and
it should either move left or right
as specified. So a program consists of
instructions like that. If you look at,
If you look at a program, you know, one of
the states is the halt state and that's
when the program halts. But you
can calculate how many programs
don't have any instruction
that transitions to the halt
state. You can easily
calculate the proportion. And
in the limit, it goes to 1
over E squared, 13 and a half
percent. If you calculate the limit, the
proportion of programs
with end states that don't
ever halt because they don't have
any instruction saying halt.
Those programs obviously never halt because
they can't halt. They don't have any
instruction that says halt.
- So 13% of programs, you could say,
- 13%, you can say they don't halt, because you
just look at them and you can understand them.
- There's no halt state.
- There's no... They never change to
the halt state, so they can't halt.
- I mean, that nevertheless
is beautiful to know.
- So that's a kind of trivial
reason for non-halting, you know.
And when I first made that observation,
I thought, "Okay, this is the proof
strategy." Because we wanted...
I wanted to say at first the
goal was, look, that's a stupid
reason for a program not to
halt. And I just want to pile up as many
stupid reasons as I can think of...
...until it gets more than
50%, and then I can say most.
- That was brilliant.
- Yeah. That was my goal.
- I love this.
- Yeah. So we thought more about
it, though, and we hit the
jackpot because we found one
gigantic stupid reason that
converged to 100%. I mean, in the
limit. And so, the stupid reason for a
program not to halt is that,
well, if you think about
the behavior, see, the head is sitting
there. It's on the leftmost cell of the
tape at the very beginning.
It's in the start
state, and the head is following an
instruction. And the instruction says,
"When you're in the start state," which it is,
"and you're reading something on the tape,
then you should write something and you should
change to a new state, and you should either move
left or right." But
half of them move left.
But if you move left and you are
already at the end, then the head falls
off. And so the computation stops
because the head fell off the tape.
That's a pretty stupid reason. Okay, but
that's half of them already just like
that. Okay, and then some of them
went right, and they changed to a new
state. And amongst those, you know, the new
state, half of those ones are going left and
half are going right from that
place, and then most of those are
changing to a new state. When there's a lot of
states, it's very likely that the next state that you
transition to is new. And so you get this
random walk behavior, if you know what that
means, where half go left and half go right at
each step. And there's a
theorem due to Pólya which is
called the Pólya recurrence
theorem, which says when you have
a random walk, a one-dimensional
random walk, then it's very
likely to come back to where you
started. And when that happens for
us, then half of them from that
place fall off on the next step.
And so you can show using
this kind of analysis that
the probability one behavior
of a random Turing machine is
that the head falls off the
tape before it repeats a
state. And that is the stupid proof that
shows how to solve the halting problem. Because when
that happens, we can answer the halting problem
saying, "No, the computation stopped
because the machine crashed, not because
it halted, so therefore it
doesn't count as halting on some
accounts." Or, you know, if you want to
define that as halting, crashing as halting,
then... But in any case, however it is
that you set up your formalism, you're
going to be able to answer the
question for the behavior of the
machine when the head falls off.
- So statistically, in the limit,
you solve the halting problem.
- Yes, exactly. Computably solve it. Yeah.
- What do we take from that? Because
you didn't solve the halting problem.
- No, it's impossible to fully solve...
...the halting problem
correctly in all cases.
- That's pretty cool. That's kind of...
I mean, I don't know. This is...
- It's a probabilistic way... I mean,
it's probabilistic in the sense that
we're solving almost all instances...
...computably. There are versions of
this that are maybe more interesting
from the point of view of complexity theory
and actually useful. I mean, there's the whole
P-NP problem and so on. And
there's this genre of NP-complete
problems, which are problems that are
infeasible. They would take
exponential time to solve them in
the ordinary way. And they're not
known to be polynomial time solvable,
although in these cases it's an open
question whether there is a polynomial time
algorithm, a feasible algorithm. And
for most for most of the NP-complete
problems, you can prove that there's a
polynomial time approximation that
solves almost all instances...
...in a feasible amount of time. So
like the knapsack problem, you know,
packing problems, and so on, other kinds
of problems, satisfaction problems,
when... Depending on how you set
up the formalism, you can prove,
and I've proven many
instances of this but also I
think it's widespread for
almost all the NP-complete
problems, the difficult problems, and these
are important problems for industrial
application when these are problems that
we actually want to solve. We can have
feasible algorithms that solve
almost every instance of them.
- The amount of fields and topics
you've worked on is truly
incredible. I have to ask about P
versus NP. This is one of the big
open problems in complexity theory. So for
people who don't know, it's about the relation
between computation time and problem
complexity. Do you think it will ever be
solved? And is there any chance
the weird counterintuitive
thing might be true that P equals NP?
- Yeah, that's an interesting question.
Sometimes people ask about whether it could be
independent, which I think is... ...An
interesting question for logicians.
And of course, well, one has
to say if you're entertaining
the idea of independence, you
know, over which theory? Because
every statement is going to be
independent over an extremely weak
theory. So that's, you know, it doesn't
make sense to say it's independent all by
itself. You're only independent relative
to a theory, right? So the way I think
about P-NP is that... I mean, of course
it's a theoretical question about
the asymptotic behavior of
these problems. I mean, for a
problem to be in P means that there,
you know, there is a computable
decision procedure that
runs in time bounded by
some polynomial. But the coefficients
on that polynomial could be
enormous, and the degree could be
incredibly high. And so for small values of
inputs, then it doesn't make sense
to talk about this polynomial
time feasibility with respect to, say,
the range of problem inputs that we will
ever give it in our lifetime or in
the span of human civilization or
whatever. I mean, because it's an
asymptotic property, it's
really in the limit as the
size of the inputs goes to infinity,
that's the only time that polynomial
or NP becomes relevant. And so maybe it's
important to keep that in
mind when. Sometimes you find
kind of overblown remarks
made about, you know, if P
equals NP, then this will be incredibly
important for human civilization
because it means that we'll have feasible
algorithms for solving these incredibly important-
... problems in NP. You
know, that it would
cause immense wealth for human
societies and so on because we
would be able to solve these
otherwise intractable problems, and
that would be the basis of new
technology and industry and so forth. I
mean, people make these
kind of remarks, but-
- Of course
- ... you have to temper those
remarks by the realization
that P and P equal NP
or P not equal NP are
not about these practical things
at all because of the asymptotic
nature of the question itself.
Okay, that's on the one hand. But on
the second hand, we already have the
algorithm, so we could use it already,
except it's a terrible algorithm because
it involves all this incredible
amount of coding and so on.
- And on the third hand, like you said, we
already have approximation algorithms
that-
- Yes
- ... that from a pragmatic
perspective, solve
all the actual real engineering
problems of human civilization.
- Like the SAT solvers work amazingly
well, you know, in lots and lots of
cases, even though we can prove we don't expect...
If P is not equal to NP, then there won't
be a polynomial time SAT solver.
But the actually the SAT solver
approximations, you know,
are really quite amazing.
- Sorry to ask the ridiculous question,
but who is the greatest mathematician...
... of all time? Who are the
possible candidates? Euler,
Gauss, Newton, Ramanujan, Hilbert. We
mentioned Gödel, Turing, if
you throw him into the bucket.
- So this is, I think, an
incredibly difficult question to
answer. Personally, I don't
really think this way
about ranking the
mathematicians by greatness.
- So you don't have, like... You know, some people
have a Taylor Swift poster in their dorm room.
You don't have it.
- I mean, if you forced me to pick someone,
it would probably be Archimedes because-
... he had such incredible
achievements in such an early
era, which totally transcended the
work of the other people in his era.
But I also have the view
that I want to learn
mathematics and gain mathematical
insight from whoever can
provide it and wherever I can
find it. And this isn't always
just coming from the greats. And
sometimes the greats are doing things
that are just first and not... You
know, somebody else could have easily
been first. And so there's a kind of
luck aspect to it when you go back and
look at, you know, the achievements.
And because of this progress
issue in mathematics that we talked about
earlier, namely, we really do understand things
much better now than they used
to. And when you look back at the
achievements that had been made, then
maybe you can imagine, you know,
thinking, "Well, you know, somebody
else could've, could've had
that insight also." And maybe they
would have. It's already a known
phenomenon that disparate mathematicians
end up proving essentially similar
results at approximately the
same time. But okay, the person who did
it first is getting the credit and so on.
- What do you make of that? Because I see
that sometimes when mathematicians...
This also applies in physics and
science, where completely separately,
discoveries are made... ...Maybe at a
very similar time. What does that mean?
- It's relatively common. I
mean, I think it's certain
ideas are in the air and being thought
about but not fully articulated, and so
this is the nature of growth in knowledge.
- Do you understand where ideas come from?
- Not really.
- I mean, what's your own process when
you're thinking through a problem?
- Yeah, that's another difficult
question. I suppose it has to do
with... I mean, my mathematical style,
my style as a mathematician, is that
I don't really like difficult mathematics.
What I love is simple, clear,
easy-to-understand arguments that
prove a surprising result.
That's my favorite
situation. And actually, so the
question of whether it's a new result
or not is somehow less important to
me. And so that has to do with this
question of the greats and so on, whoever does
it first. Because I think, for example, if
you prove a new result with a bad
argument or complicated argument,
that's great because you proved
something new. But I still
want to see the beautiful simple because
that's what I can understand. Also,
I mean, I'm kind of naturally
skeptical about any
complicated argument because
it might be wrong. And-
...if I can't really understand
it fully, like every single
step all at once in my head,
then I'm just worried maybe it's
wrong. And so these different
styles, sometimes mathematicians get
involved with these enormous
research projects that involve
huge numbers of working parts and-
...different technology coming together. I
mean, mathematical technology, not physical
technology.
- And sometimes it actually involves now more
and more something like the Lean programming
language where some parts are
automated, so you have this gigantic-
- Yeah, yeah, I see. Well, that's another
issue because maybe those things are, you
know, less subject to
skepticism when it's validated-
...by Lean. But I'm thinking about
the case where the arguments
are just extremely complicated,
and so I sort of worry whether
it's right or not, whereas you
know, I like the simple thing. And
so, so I tend to have often
worked on things that are
a little bit off the beaten
path from what other people are
working on from that point of view.
- Your curiosity draws
you towards simplicity.
- Yeah. I wanna work on the things that
I can understand and that are s-
And luckily, I've found that I've
been able to make contributions
that other people seem to
like, you know, in this way,
in this style. And so I've been kind
of fortunate from that point of view.
I mean, my process always, though, and I've
recommended this always to my students,
is just a kind of playful
curiosity. So whenever I have...
whenever there's an idea or a topic,
then I just play around with it and
change little things or
understand a basic case and then
make it more complicated or press
things a little bit on this
side or apply the idea to my favorite
example, you know, that's relevant or,
and see what happens, or you just
play around with ideas, and this
often leads to insights that then lead to
more methods or more, you know,
then pretty soon you're making
progress on the problem.
And so this is basically my
method, is I just, you know, fool
around with the ideas until I can
see a path through towards
something interesting.
And then prove that, and that's
worked extremely well for me.
So I'm pretty pleased with that method.
- You do like thought experiments where you
anthropomorphize, like you mentioned?
- Yeah, yeah. So this is a basic tool. I mean,
I use this all the time. You know, you
imagine a set-theoretic
model, a model of ZFC as like
a place where you're living, and you
might travel to distant lands by
forcing, and this is a kind of metaphor for
what's going on. Of course, you know, the actual
arguments aren't anything
like that because there's not land, and
you're not traveling and you're not...
- But you allow your mind to visualize that
kind of thing, in the natural real world.
- And it helps you to understand, particularly
when there's parts of the argument that are in
tension with one another, then you can
imagine that people are fighting or
something. And those kind of metaphors,
you know, or you imagine it in
terms of a game-theoretic, you know, two
players trying to win. So that's kind of
tension. And those kind of metaphorical
ways of understanding a mathematical
problem often are extremely
helpful in realizing,
aha, the enemy is going to
pick this thing to be like
that because, you know, it makes
it more continuous or whatever,
and then we should do this other
thing in order to... So it
makes you realize mathematical
strategies for finding the
answer and proving the theorem that
you want to prove because of the
ideas that come out of
that anthropomorphization.
- What do you think of somebody like
Andrew Wiles, who spent seven years
grinding at one of the hardest problems
in the history of mathematics? And
maybe contrasting that a little bit with
somebody who's also brilliant, Terence
Tao, who basically says
if he hits a wall, he
just switches to a different problem
and he comes back and so on. So it's
less of a focused grind
for many years without
any guarantee that you'll get there,
which is what Andrew Wiles went through.
Maybe Grigori Perelman did the same.
- I mean, Wiles proved an amazing theorem,
the Fermat's Last Theorem result is
incredible. This is a totally
different style than my own
practice, though, of working
in isolation. I mean, for me,
mathematics is often a kind
of social activity. I have-
I counted, I mean, it's pushing towards
a hundred collaborators, co-authors on
various papers and so on. And, you
know, anybody has an idea they
want to talk about with me, if I'm
interested in it, then I'm gonna wanna
collaborate with them and we might solve
the problem and have a joint paper or
whatever. You wanna have
a joint paper? Let me-
- Yeah, exactly. Let's go.
- So my approach to, like,
making mathematical progress
tends to involve working with other people
quite a lot rather than just working on
my- ...own, and I enjoy that
aspect very much. So I,
personally, I couldn't ever do what Wiles
did. Maybe I'm missing out. Maybe if
I locked myself, you know, in the bedroom
and just worked on whatever, then,
uh, I would solve it. But I tend
to think that no, actually, like
being on MathOverflow so
much and I've gotten so
many ideas, so many papers have
grown out of the MathOverflow
conversations and back and forth. Someone
posts an, you know, someone posts a
question and I post an answer on part of it, and
then someone else has an idea and it turns into a
full solution, and then we have a three-way
paper coming out of that. That's happened
many times. And so for
me, it's... I enjoy this
kind of social aspect to it.
And it's not just the social
part. Rather, that's the nature of
mathematical investigation as I see it, is
putting forth mathematical
ideas to other people and they
respond to it in a way that
helps me learn, helps them
learn, and I think that's a very
productive way of undertaking mathematics.
- I think it's when you work
solo on mathematics, from my
outsider perspective, it
seems terrifyingly lonely.
And because you're, especially
if you do stick to a single
problem, especially if that
problem has broken many brilliant
mathematicians in the past, that
you're really putting all your chips
in. And just the torment-
...the rollercoaster of day to...
that day. Because I imagine
you have these moments of hopeful
break, mini breakthroughs, and then
you have to deal with the
occasional realization
that, no, it was not a breakthrough,
and that disappointment.
And then you have to go,
like, a weekly, maybe daily
disappointment where you hit a wall,
and you have no other person to
brainstorm with. You have no
other avenue to pursue. And it's
I don't know. The mental fortitude it
takes to go through that. But every-
Everybody's different. Some
people are recluse and just
really find solace in that lone
grind. I have to ask about
Grisha Grigori Perelman. What
do you think of him famously
declining the Fields Medal
and the Millennial Prize?
So he stated, "I'm not interested
in money or fame. The prize is
completely irrelevant to me. If
the proof is correct, then no
other recognition is needed." What do
you think of him turning down the prize?
- I guess what I think is that
mathematics is full of a
lot of different kinds of
people. And my attitude is that,
hey, it doesn't matter. Maybe they have
a good math idea, and so I want to
talk to them and interact with
them. And so I think the Perelman
case, you know, is maybe an
instance where, you know, he's
such a brilliant mind and he
solved this extremely famous and
difficult problem, and that
is a huge achievement.
But he also had these
views about, you know,
prizes and somehow, I don't really fully
understand why he would turn it down.
- I do think I have a similar
thing, just observing Olympic
athletes that, in many cases,
don't get paid very much,
and they nevertheless dedicate their
entire lives for the pursuit...
...of the gold medal. I think his case
is a reminder that some of the greatest
mathematicians, some of the greatest
scientists and human beings do the thing
they do, take on these
problems for the love
of it, not for the prizes or
the money or any of that.
Now, as you're saying, if the
money comes, you could use it for
stuff. If the prizes come, and the
fame, and so on, that might be
useful. But the reason fundamentally the
greats do it is because of the art itself.
- Sure, I totally agree with that.
I mean, I share the view. That's,
you know, that's why I'm a mathematician
is because I find the question so
compelling and I've spent my whole life
thinking about these problems.
But, you know, if I won an award -
- Yeah, it's great. It's great. I mean,
I'm pretty sure you don't contribute to
MathOverflow for the wealth,
and the power. That you gain.
I mean, it's genuine curiosity.
- Well, you asked who the
greatest mathematician is, and
of course, if we want to be truly objective
about it, we would need a kind of an
objective criteria.
- Criteria, yeah.
- About how to evaluate the
relative strength and the
reputation of various mathematicians.
And so, of course, we should use
MathOverflow score. ...Because -
- That you're definitively. I mean, nobody's
objectively the greatest mathematician of
all time.
- Yes, that's true. I've also argued
that tenure and promotion decisions
should be based...
- Based on MathOverflow.
- ...Yeah. So my daughter
introduced me to her boyfriend.
and told me that she had
a boyfriend. And I, um-
- asked him what his MathOverflow...
- I wanted to know, first of
all, what is his chess rating,
and secondly, what is
his MathOverflow score?
- Oh, man. Well, that's the only way to
judge a person, I think. That's, I
think, objectively correct. Yeah.
I mean, since you bring up chess, I've got
to ask you about infinite chess. I can't let
you go. You've, I mean, you worked on a
million things, but infinite chess is one of
them. Somebody asked on MathOverflow,
the mathematical definition of chess.
- Right.
- So can we talk about the math of chess
and the math of infinite chess? What
is infinite chess?
- Oh, yeah, absolutely. Infinite chess
is fantastic. Chess ordinarily is
played on this tiny, tiny board. It's
an eight by eight board, right? So
when you play chess, normally it's on the
eight by eight board. But we want to play
infinite chess, so on the, on the
integer board. It's infinite
in all four directions, you
know, but it still has the chessboard pattern,
and maybe there's pieces on this board,
maybe infinitely many pieces we
allow. But one difference from
finite ordinary chess, in infinite chess,
we don't play from a standard starting
position. Rather, you... The
interesting situation is that you present
a position where there's a lot of
pieces already on the board in a complicated
way, and you say, "What would it
be like to start from this position or
from that one?" You know, and we want to
produce positions that have
interesting features, meaning
mathematically interesting
features. And so I can tell you for
example, probably a lot of people
are familiar with, say, the
mate in two genre of chess problem.
You know, you have a chess problem and it's
white to mate in two, which means that
white is going to make two moves, but the
second move is going to be a checkmate.
Or maybe mate in three or mate in
five or whatever. We can have mate in
N positions for any N. I mean, in
infinite chess, you can create a position
which is not mate in N for any N, but
white has a winning strategy that will win
infinitely many moves. So in other words,
let me say it again. There are
positions in infinite chess that
white can definitely win.
Infinitely many moves, white is
going to make checkmate.
But there's no particular N
for which white can
guarantee to win in N moves.
- There's no N?
- No N. So it's not mate in N
for any N, but it's a white
win, infinitely many. The
way to think about it is,
white is going to win, but black
controls how long it takes.
- Ah, got it.
- But it's doomed. Black can say, "Well, I know
you're gonna win, but this time it's gonna...
you're gonna take a
thousand moves at least."
Or maybe in a different way of playing, black can say,
"Well, I know you're gonna win, but this time you're
gonna have to take a million moves." For
any number, black can say that. So it's
these really interesting positions.
There's a position in my first
infinite chess paper. So it's black
to play in this position, and
if black doesn't move that rook there,
then white is gonna
checkmate pretty quickly.
- By the way, can we describe
the rules of infinite chess?
- Right. So the rules of infinite chess
are there's just the ordinary pieces,
and they move on this infinite board, which
is just a chessboard, but extended in
all directions- infinitely, with
no edge. So there's no boundary.
But the pieces move just like you'd expect.
So the knights move just the same and the
rooks move, you know, on the ranks and files,
and the bishops move on the same color
diagonals and, just like you would expect,
except they can move as far as they
want, you know, if there's no
intervening piece in the way.
The one thing is that, okay,
so the white pawns always
move upwards and the black pawns always
move downwards, but when they're
capturing, the pawns, you know,
capture on the diagonal. So I
think the piece movement is
pretty clear. There's a couple
of differences that you have to pay
attention to from ordinary chess. For
example, there's this threefold repetition
rule in ordinary chess, but we
just get rid of this for infinite
chess because, of course, threefold
repetition is just a proxy for infinite
play. The real rule is
infinite play is a draw, not
threefold repetition is a draw.
That's just a kind of convenient
approximation to the, what I view
as the actual rule, which is that
infinite play is a draw. So the only
way to win is to make checkmate on
the board at a finite stage of play.
And if you play infinitely, you
haven't done that, and so it's a draw.
- And the pawns can't be converted into-
- And there's no promotion 'cause
there's no edge. Right, exactly. And
this position that we were just talking about
is a position with game value omega, which
means that because it has
an ordinal value, white is
going to win, but black can play as though
counting down from omega. What is
the nature of counting down from
omega? If you're black and you need
to count down from omega, then
you have to say a finite number,
and then after that, it's gonna
be at most that many numbers
afterwards to count down, right? So the
nature of counting down from omega is
that you take this giant
step on the first count,
and then after that, you subtract one
each time. You can't subtract one from
omega because that's not an ordinal. So
if you count down from omega, you have
to go to some finite number, and then if
you just subtract one each time, then
that's how many more moves you get.
So that's the sense in which black
can make it take as long as he wants
because he can pick his initial
number to be whatever he wants.
- By the way, I just noticed that you were citing
a MathOverflow question, which is really
cool.
- That's right, yeah. My interest in infinite chess
was born on MathOverflow 'cause someone asked
this question.
- Noam Elkies asked this question. That's
so cool to see a MathOverflow citation
in an arXiv paper. That's cool.
How do you construct the position-
- Right
- the position that satisfies this? Is
there an algorithm for construction?
- No. This is an act of mathematical
creativity, really, to come up
with... I had a co-author, my
co-author, Corey Evans. He's a
US national master chess player.
A very strong chess player. He's
also a philosophy professor of law.
- Your collaborations are
wonderful. That's great.
- So I met him because he was a grad student
at CUNY where I was at the time in New York.
And also he was my son's chess
coach for when my son was
playing chess competitively
in elementary school.
Then Corey was the coach.
And so we knew him that
way. And that was right around the
time when I was getting interested in
infinite chess, and I knew I needed
a chess-knowledgeable partner. And
so Corey was invaluable
for the paper because
the proofs in infinite chess are extremely
finicky because you
create these positions,
but the details of the argument
have to do with kind of chess
reasoning, you know? My chess reasoning
wasn't quite up to it
because I would create
the positions. Almost all the
positions are ones that I made,
but this is like after many generations,
of being corrected by Corey because Corey
would come and say, "Hey, you know, this pawn
is hanging, and it breaks
your argument, and"
"or, or, you know, this bishop can leak
out" "of the cage," or whatever. And so...
the process was I knew kind of
in terms of these ordinals
what we needed to create with
the position, and I would struggle to
do it and create something that sort
of had the features that I wanted, and then
I would show it to Corey and he would say,
"Look, it doesn't work because of this and
that," and so on. And so this kind of back and
forth was extremely helpful to me, and
eventually we, you know, converged
on arguments that were correct.
So it's... yeah, it's quite
interesting. Also, maybe
another thing to say is the follow-up
paper to this one was a three-way
paper with also Corey and myself and my
PhD student, Norman Perlmutter,
in which we improved the bound.
So we were aiming to produce more and more chess
positions with higher and higher ordinal values.
chess positions with higher
and higher ordinal values.
So the initial position was value omega, and then we
made omega-squared and omega-cubed in the first paper,
omega-squared and omega-cubed in the first paper, and then
in this three-way collaboration, we made omega to the 4th.
then in this three-way collaboration,
we made omega to the 4th.
- The title of the paper: The Position
in Infinite Chess with Game Value
Omega to the 4th.
- Right. And so, at the time,
this was the best-known result,
the sort of state of the art, but
since that time, it's been improved
now dramatically. And, in fact, we
know now that every countable ordinal
arises as the game value of a position in
infinite chess, so it's a fantastic result.
- Before I forget, let me ask about your
views on AI and LLMs that are getting
better and better in mathematics. We've spoken
about collaborators, and you have so many
collaborators. Do you see AI as a
potential great collaborator to you as a
mathematician, and what do you
think the future role of those-
kinds of AI systems is?
- I guess I would draw a distinction
between what we have currently
and what might come in future years. I've
played around with it and I've tried
experimenting, but I haven't
found it helpful at all,
basically zero. It's not helpful to me.
helpful to me. And, you know, I've
used various systems and so on, the
paid models and so on. My typical
experience is interacting with AI on a
mathematical question is
that it gives me garbage
answers that are not
mathematically correct.
And so I find that not
helpful and also frustrating.
Like, if I was interacting
with a person, the frustrating
thing is when you have to argue
about whether or not, you know, the
argument that they gave you is right,
and you point out exactly the error,
in the AI saying, "Oh,
it's totally fine." And,
you know, if I were having such an
experience with a person, I would simply
refuse to talk to that person again.
But okay, one has to overlook
these kind of flaws.
And so I tend to be a kind of skeptic about
the value of the current AI systems as
far as mathematical reasoning
is concerned. It seems not
reliable. Okay, but I know for a
fact that many, that there are several
prominent mathematicians whom I have
enormous respect for, who are saying
that they are using it in a way
that's helpful, and I'm often
very surprised to hear that
based on my own experience, which
is quite the opposite. And so
maybe my process isn't any good,
although, you know, I use it for other
things, like, you know,
for programming things or
for image generation and
so on. It's amazingly
powerful and helpful. But
for mathematical arguments,
I haven't found it helpful, and maybe I'm
not interacting with it in the right way.
Yet, or it could be. And so
maybe I just need to improve my
skill. But also maybe I wonder,
like, these examples that
are provided by other people maybe
involved quite a huge amount of
interaction, and so I wonder
if maybe the mathematical
ideas are really coming from the person,
you know, these great mathematicians
who are doing it rather than the AI. And
so so I tend to be kind of skeptical. But
also, I'm skeptical for
another reason, and that is
because of the nature of the
large language model approach
to AI doing mathematics. Um, I recognize
that the AI is trying to give me
an argument that sounds
like a proof rather than an
argument that is a proof. The
motivation is misplaced. And so I
worry that this is a very
dangerous source of error
because it often happens in
mathematics that, I mean, if I
think back to when I was an undergrad,
you know, here at Caltech, and I
was a math major eventually, and at that
time, LaTeX was a pretty new thing,
and I was learning LaTeX, and
so I was typing up my homeworks in
LaTeX and they looked beautiful.
Actually, they looked like garbage.
From my current standards,
I'm sure it was terrible.
Except at the time, you know, I didn't
know anything. I was an undergrad,
and LaTeX was sort of unheard of.
And so I was producing these
beautifully typeset, you know,
problem sets, solutions, and so on. And
I would print it up and submit it and
so on, and the grades would come back,
terrible grades. And I
realized what was happening
is that the, you know,
the copy was so beautiful
mathematically typeset in this way. It looked
like the kind of mathematics you find in a
book, you know?
Because basically that's the only time you saw
that kind of mathematical typesetting was in
a, in a professional, you
know, published book.
And those me- that mathematics
was almost always correct-
... in a book, right? And so I
had somehow, you know, lost my-
... because it was so beautiful, and I'm
used to only seeing that kind of type
setting when an argument was,
you know, totally right-
... I wasn't critical enough, and
making these sort of bonehead
mistakes in the proofs. And, and so,
okay, so I, I corrected this, of course.
- But this kind of effect is very much real
with the modern LLM system. That's right.
- And so I think that the chat programs
and so on are producing
these arguments that look
really, they look like a... that's
what they're striving to do,
that it's what they're designed
to do. They're not designed to
make a logically correct argument.
They're designed to make something that
looks like a logically correct
argument. And it's easy to get
fooled if you're not skeptical. And
so that's why I worry a bit when
people rely on AI for
mathematical arguments.
I mean, using... tying them
to Lean in the formal proof,
um verification systems and so
on, this is a totally different
way of operating. But for the sort of
ordinary person sitting down and using
chat to come up with a mathematical
argument, I think it's a dangerous
source of error if you're
not especially attuned
to this very issue that
the AI is going to produce
something that's not grounded in
mathematical understanding, but
rather something that is trying
to look like something that is grounded
in mathematical understanding. And those
are not the same thing at all. And
furthermore, I really wonder if
one can make a kind of system for
producing genuine mathematical insight
that isn't based in what I would view as
mathematical understanding
as opposed to the text
generation systems. The methods
that are used, you know, they
don't seem close enough grounded in
understanding of the underlying mathematical
concepts, but rather grounded in
the way words appear on a page in
arguments about those concepts, which are
not the same.
- So there's a couple of things to say there.
So one, I think there is a real skill in
providing the LLM system with enough
information to be a good collaborator.
Because you really are dealing with a different...
It's not a human being. You really have to load
in everything you possibly
can from your body of
work, from the way you're thinking,
and that's a real skill. And then the
other thing is, you know, for
me, if it's at all anything
like programming, because I have a
lot of colleagues and friends who
are programmers who kind of feel
similarly to you. And for me, I've
gotten better and better and
better at giving as much
information as possible to the systems
in a really structured way, maybe
because I just like natural
language as a way to express
my thinking. And then the
benefit comes from the
inspiration that the system
can provide by its ability to
know a lot of things and
make connections between
disparate fields and between disparate
concepts. And in that way, it provides
not the answer but the inspiration, the
handholding, the camaraderie
that helps me get to the
answer, because it does know a lot more
than me. Know, like knowledge. And if you
give it a lot of information and ask the
broader questions, it can make some really
beautiful connections. But
I do find that I have to be
extremely patient, like you said.
The, the amount of times
I'll do something dumb where
I feel like, "Uh, you don't get this at
all, do you?" That's a source of a lot
of frustration for us humans.
Like, "This... Wait, this
thing doesn't understand at all." If
you can have the patience to look past
that, there might be some brilliant
little insights that it can provide.
- Right.
- At least for me in the realm
of programming. I should say
programming, there's just so much
training data. There's so much
there. And at least I see
the light at the end of the
tunnel of promising possibilities
of it being a good
collaborator, versus like
something that gives you really
true genius-level insights.
- Right. It's probably true. Uh,
I also find it likely that a
lot of the... As far as mathematical
training data is concerned,
I just have to assume that math overflow
answers are part of the training data.
- Yes, of course.
- It's so...
- And you're...
- So-
- I mean, you're talking to
yourself, essentially.
- Yeah, maybe.
- Sorry for the ridiculously big
question, but what idea in mathematics
is most beautiful to you?
We've talked about so many.
- The most beautiful idea
in mathematics is the
transfinite ordinals. These
were the number system
invented by Georg Cantor
about counting beyond
infinity, just the idea of
counting beyond infinity.
I mean, you count through the ordinary
numbers, the natural numbers: zero, one, two,
three, and so on. And then you're not done
because after that comes omega, and then
omega plus one, and omega plus
two, and so on. And you can always
add one. And so of course
after you count through
all those numbers of the form
omega plus N, then you get to
omega plus omega, the first
number after all those. And
then comes omega plus omega plus
one, and so on. You can always add
one. And so you can just keep counting
through the ordinals. It never
ends. Eventually, you get to
omega times three, omega times
four, and so on. And then the limit of
those numbers, the first number that
comes after all those numbers
will be omega squared.
And this one is the first
compound limit ordinal
because it's a limit ordinal,
is one of these numbers, an
ordinal that doesn't have an
immediate predecessor like omega and
omega times two, omega times three.
Those are all limit ordinals.
But omega squared is a limit
ordinal, but it's also a
limit of limit ordinals
because the omega times three,
omega times four, and so on, those are
all limit ordinals that limit up to omega
squared. And then, of course, you
form omega squared plus one, and
then omega squared plus two, and so
on, and it never stops. And it's
just absolutely beautiful and amazing, and
furthermore, forms the
foundation for these
transfinite recursive constructions
that came later. I mean
starting with the Cantor-Bendixson theorem
that I mentioned. And continuing with,
the construction of the V hierarchy
and Gödel's constructible
universe is built this way,
and Zermelo's proof of the
well-order principle using the
axiom of choice is a transfinite
recursive construction. And,
and so the idea of just
counting past infinity
is so simple and elegant, and has led
to so much fascinating mathematics.
- Yeah, the infinity's not
the end. And what about
philosophy? What to you is the
most beautiful idea in philosophy?
- So I have a foot in both fields:
philosophy and mathematics, and
in some contexts I seem to be required to
choose whether I'm a mathematician or a
philosopher. I mean, my training is in
mathematics. My PhD, all my degrees are
mathematics. But somehow I turned
myself into a philosopher over
the years because my mathematical work
was engaging with these philosophical
issues. And so when I went... In New
York, I had appointments first in
mathematics only, but then eventually I was
also joining the philosophy
faculty at the graduate
center. And when I went to Oxford for the
first time, my main appointment was in
philosophy, and that's also true now
at Notre Dame although I'm
also a concurrent professor in
mathematics. And I have math PhD students
still and philosophy PhD students. And so
I don't really care to decide whether
I'm a mathematician or a philosopher.
And my work is engaging
with mathematics and with
philosophical issues in
mathematics and with plain
philosophy, and there's
this ample region between
these re- between these two
subjects. So it's not necessary to
choose. I remember when I first
went to Oxford and I told my
daughter that I was going to become
professor of philosophy in Oxford,
And she looked at me
plaintively and said, "Uh,
but, but Papa, you're not a
philosopher. Because in her
mind, you know, her father was the
mathematician and her mother was the
philosopher 'cause my wife, Barbara, is a
philosopher. Now also at Notre Dame.
We're together there. And okay, but
fortunately, I don't really have
to choose between them. So you
ask about the most beautiful idea in
philosophy, and I would have to say
that I think it's the distinction between
truth and proof, the one that we discussed
already. Um, it's, it's so profound and
gets at the heart of so many
philosophical issues. I
mean, of course this is a distinction
that's maybe born in mathematics
or mathematical logic, but that's
already philosophical to a
degree, and it's ph- you know, fundamentally
a philosophical distinction. The
truth is about the,
nature of the world and the way
things are. It's about objective
reality in a sense.
Whereas proof is about our
understanding of the world
and about how we come
to know the things that
we know about the world.
And so to focus on proof is to focus
on the interaction that we have with
the objective reality. And, okay,
I'm talking about the reality
of mathematics, not the physical world, because,
as I said, I live in the Platonic realm
and I interact with
mathematical reality, and so
proof is about the interaction
and how we come to know the
facts that are true in this mathematical
reality, whereas truth is
about what's really the case,
sort of apart from our knowledge of
it. And this is, I think, such a
core way that I have of
understanding the world
and the nature of logic and reasonings.
- And the gap between the
two is full of fascinating
mysteries, both in the Platonic
realm, but also in the
physics realm, and I would
even say in the human
psychology, sociology,
politics, geopolitics, all of
it, if you think about proof more
generally, which is the process
of discovery versus the truth itself.
And that's our journey whatever
field we're in. Well, I
for one, am grateful for
how marvelous of a philosopher,
mathematician, and human being you
are. It's truly an honor
to speak with you today.
- Well, thank you so much. It's such a pleasure
to be here, and thank you for inviting me.
- Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Joel David Hamkins.
To support this podcast, please check
out our sponsors in the description
where you can also find links to
contact me, ask questions, get
feedback, and so on. Thank you for
listening. As always, happy New Year.
I love you all.